Extracting Collective Probabilistic Forecasts from Web
Games


David M. Pennock
Steve Lawrence
NEC Research Institute
4 Independence Way
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
[dpennock,lawrence]
@research.nj.nec.com
Finn ~,rup Nielsen
Informatics and Mathematical
Modelling
Technical University of
Denmark
DK-2800 Lyngby,Denmark
fn@imm.dtu.dk
C. Lee Giles
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
University Park,
PA 16801 USA
giles@ist.psu.edu



ABSTRACT
Game sites on the World Wide Web draw people from around
the world with specialized interests, skills, and knowledge.
Data from the games often reflects the players' expertise and
will to win. We extract probabilistic forecasts from data ob-
tained from three online games: the Hollywood Stock Ex-
change (HSX), the Foresight Exchange (FX), and the For-
mula One Pick Six (F1P6) competition. We find that all
three yield accurate forecasts of uncertain future events. In
particular, prices of so-called "movie stocks" on HSX are
good indicators of actual box office returns. Prices of HSX
securities in Oscar, Emmy, and Grammy awards correlate
well with observed frequencies of winning. FX prices are
reliable indicators of future developments in science and
technology. Collective predictions from players in the F1
competition serve as good forecasts of true race outcomes.
In some cases, forecasts induced from game data are more
reliable than expert opinions. We argue that web games
naturally attract well-informed and well-motivated players,
and thus offer a valuable and oft-overlooked source of high-
quality data with significant predictive value.


Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications--
data mining; H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Online Information Systems--web-based services; J.4 [Com-
puter Applications]: Social and Behavioral Sciences--
economics; K.8 [Computing Milieux]: Personal Comput-
ing-games

*This work conducted while visiting the NEC Research In-
stitute.



Permissionto makedigitalor hardcopiesofall or partofthisworkfor
personalorclassroomuse is grantedwithoutfee providedthatcopies
are notmadeor distributedfor profitor commercialadvantageand that
copiesbearthisnoticeand the fullcitationon the firstpage.To copy
otherwise,to republish,to poston servel=sor to redistributeto lists,
requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora fee.
KDD01 San FranciscoCA USA
CopyrightACM2001 1-58113-391-x/01/08...$5.00
Keywords
Collective probabilistic forecasts, World Wide Web games,
data mining, knowledge discovery, artificial markets, Hol-
lywood Stock Exchange, Foresight Exchange, Formula One
Pick Six Competition


1. INTRODUCTION
Multiplayer games on the World Wide Web are growing
in prevalence and popularity, fueled in part by low operating
costs and global reach. Game players tend to be more knowl-
edgeable and enthusiastic about their game's topic than the
public at large. For example, the Hollywood Stock Exchange
(HSX), a play-money market where traders bet on the fu-
ture success of movies mad stars, draws heavily from among
film aficionados. In this paper, we investigate the use of
such online games as topic-focused sources of data with rel-
atively high signal-to-noise ratios, as compared to the web
as a whole.
Section 2 discusses background and related work in ex-
ploiting collective knowledge to generate forecasts. Section 3
describes the three games under study. Sections 4 and 5 eval-
uate the collective competence of HSX players in predicting
box office results and entertainment award outcomes, re-
spectively. In both cases, we find that HSX forecasts are as
accurate or more accurate than expert judgments. Section 6
shows that prices on the Foresight Exchange (FX) corre-
late strongly with observed outcome frequencies for events
of broad scientific and societal interest. Section 7 examines
the Formula One Pick Six (F1P6) competition, showing that
a simple weighting of participants' predictions seems as re-
liable or more reliable than even the official race odds. Sec-
tion 8 discusses the more general prospects of mining data
and extracting knowledge from a variety of online games and
related sources.


2.
COLLECTIVE FORECASTS
For decades, and across many disciplines, scientists have
investigated combiningforecasts from multiple sources. Gen-
est and Zidek [15] and French [13] survey the extensive lit-
erature on combining probability assessments from multiple
experts. Clemen [3] reviews the equally large (and related)
body of work on combining forecasts; most studies conclude




174

that collective forecasts are indeed more accurate than indi-
vidual ones. Some of today's best machine learning methods
are so-called ensemble algorithms that combine classifica-
tions from multiple learners to yield more robust classifica-
tions [7]. Collaborative filtering algorithms or recommender
systems leverage community information about many peo-
ple's preferences in order to recommend items of interest
(e.g., movies or books) to individuals [29].
Markets can also be thought of as combination devices.
Prices reflect information distributed among many traders,
each with direct monetary incentives to act on any pertinent
information. Informative prices often translate directly into
accurate forecasts of future events. For example, prices of
financial options are good probability assessments of the fu-
ture prices of the underlying assets [31]; prices in political
stock markets, like the Iowa Electronic Market (IEM), 1 can
furnish better estimates of likely election outcomes than tra-
ditional polls [11, 12]; odds in horse races, determined solely
by how much is bet on which horses, match very closely
with the horses' actual frequencies of winning [1, 30, 32, 33,
35]; and point-spread betting markets yield unbiased pre-
dictions of sporting event outcomes [14].
Several studies
demonstrate that, in a laboratory setting, markets are often
able to aggregate information optimally [10, 25, 26, 27].
In a game without monetary rewards, incentives to reveal
information presumably derive from entertainment value,
educational value, bragging rights, and/or other intangible
sources.
Our recent investigations [22, 23] conclude that
even market games show signs of collective competence. For
example, arbitrage opportunities on HSX (i.e., loopholes
that allow traders to earn a sure profit without risk) tend
to disappear over time, just as they do in real markets. Sec-
tions 4, 5, and 6 show that intangible rewards seem suffi-
cient to drive forecast accuracy in market games. Section 7
presents evidence that, even without the "carrot" of mone-
tary compensation, F1P6 players are motivated enough to
generate very accurate collective predictions of Formula One
racing outcomes.


3.
THE GAMES

3.1
The Hollywood Stock Exchange
The Hollywood Stock Exchange (HSX) 2 is a popular on-
line market game, with approximately 400,000 registered ac-
counts. New accounts begin with H$ two million in "Holly-
wood dollars". Participants can buy and sell movie stocks,
star bonds, movie options, and award options.
The cur-
rent top portfolio is worth just over H$1 billion. High rank-
ing portfolios are actually sold at auction on Ebay3 for real
money on a regular basis. Based on these sales, the "ex-
change rate" seems to be approximately H$1 million to US$1,
with the rate increasing for higher ranked portfolios. HSX
is beginning to offer new investment opportunities backed
with real money. For example, HSX investors could pur-
chase shares in the movie American Psycho for H$1 mil-
lion each; these shares paid off about US$1 for every US$5
million of the movie's box office proceeds. HSX cofounder

1http://www, biz. uiowa, edu/iem/. Other election markets
have opened in Canada (http://esm.ubc. ca/) and Austria
(http ://ebweb. tuwien, ac. at/apsm/).
2http://w~rw.hsx. com/
3http://www. ebay. com/
Max Keiser hosts a weekly radio broadcast in Los Angeles,
and appears regularly on NBC's Access Hollywood to dis-
cuss HSX information. HSX also sponsors a booth at the
Sundance Film Festival, and holds an annual Oscar party
in Hollywood. Media reports suggest that HSX prices are
taken seriously by some Hollywood insiders.
Although the current price of any HSX movie stock is
based on the collective whims of HSX traders, the value
of the stock is ultimately grounded in the corresponding
movie's performance at the box office.
Specifically, after
the movie has spent four weeks in release, the stock delists
and cashes out: shareholders receive H$1 per share for every
US$1 million that the movie has grossed up to that point
in the US domestic market, as reported by ACNielsen EDI,
Inc.4 Traders buy (resp., short sell) stocks that they believe
underestimate (overestimate) the movie's eventual perfor-
mance. The current price, then, is a collective forecast of
the movie's four-week box office returns)
The prices of some stocks adjust after their first weekend
in wide, national release. On Friday, trading in the stock
is halted; on Sunday, the price adjusts to H$2.9 times the
movie's weekend box office numbers (in US$ millions).6 In
this case, the stock's price prior to wide release is the HSX
traders' forecast of 2.9 times the movie's opening weekend
proceeds.
The 2.9 factor is meant to project the movie's
four week total based on its opening weekend results.
Occasionally, HSX offers "award options" associated with
particular entertainment awards ceremonies--for example,
the 72nd Annual Academy Awards, or Oscars, sponsored
by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in
2000. Five options, corresponding to the five award nomi-
nees, are available within each award category (for example,
Oscar award options were available for each of the eight
major Oscar categories of best picture, best actor, best ac-
tress, best supporting actor, best supporting actress, best
director, best original screenplay, and best adapted screen-
play). Within each category, the winning option cashes out
at H$25, and the other four cash out at H$0. Before awards
are announced, an option's price can be interpreted as its
estimated likelihood of winning. For example, when Kevin
Spacey's price was twice that of Denzel Washington, the
consensus of HSX opinions was that Spacey was roughly
twice as likely to win as Washington. By normalizing prices
within each category, likelihoods can be converted into prob-
abilities.

3.2 The Foresight Exchange
Hanson [17, 18] proposes what he calls an Idea Futures
market, where participants trade in securities that pay off
contingent on future developments in science, technology,
or other arenas of public interest. For example, a security
might pay off US$1 if and only if a cure for cancer is discov-
ered by a certain date. He argues that the reward structure
of such a market encourages honest revelation of opinions
among scientists, yielding more accurate forecasts for use
by funding agencies, public policy leaders, the media, and

4http ://www.entdat a.com/
~Although cash holdings do accrue interest on HSX, all anal-
yses in this paper ignore any time value of Hollywood dol-
lars.
6Movies released on holiday weekends, and movies with sub-
stantial box office receipts prior to wide release, may adjust
differently.




175

other interested parties. The concept is operational as a web
game called the Foresight Exchan9e (FX). 7 There are cur-
rently on the order of 3000 registered participants and 200
active claims. Players start with an initial amount of "FX
bucks" and receive an allowance every week, up to a certain
maximum.
Participants can buy and sell existing claims,
or submit their own claims. Each claim is assigned a judge
to arbitrate ambiguous wording, and to ultimately deter-
mine whether the claim is true or not on the judgment date.
Claims range from technical (e.g., FX$1 if and only if an
algorithm for three satisfiability is developed with a partic-
ular runtime complexity by the year 2020) to sociopolitical
(e.g., FX$1 if and only if Japan possesses nuclear missiles by
2020) to irreverent (e.g, FX$1 if and only if Madonna names
her first child Jesus). The developers of the site intend for
the prices of these claims to be interpreted as assessments
of the probabilities of the various events.

3.3
The Formula One Pick Six Competition
Formula One (F1) is one of the prime international race
car competitions. Drivers compete in approximately 16 races
during a season, accumulating points according to how well
they place within each race. The sport draws a large and
avid following, especially in Europe. Betting on the sport
is also quite popular. A variety of bookmakers, both online
and off, support bets on the outcomes of individual F1 races
and on the results of an entire season. Media coverage of the
sport is fairly extensive, including a variety of informative
websites (e.g., http:llwww.motorsport.com/).
Formula One Pick Six (F1P6) is an email- and web-based
competition for predicting F1 outcomes)
The game has
been in existence for a number of years, and currently has
several thousand registered participants. No monetary re-
ward is associated with the F1P6 competition. The goal is
to correctly forecast the top six drivers of each race. Pax-
ticipants receive a score based one how well their ranking of
drivers matches the actual result. For each correct driver-
place prediction, they receive 10 points.
For each driver
prediction that is one place off, they receive 6 points. For
each driver prediction that is 2, 3, 4, or 5 places off, they
receive 4, 3, 2, or 1 points, respectively. Drivers that finish
in seventh place and below are disregarded. Wasserman [34]
describes statistical analyses of the first three years (1994-
1996) of the competition.


4.
BOX OFFICE FORECASTS: HSX MOVIE
STOCKS
In this section, we evaluate HSX movie box office forecasts
according to several error metrics. We also investigate the
benefit of augmenting game data with outside information
to boost prediction quality.
Recall that, before a movie's opening weekend, its price
on HSX is an estimate of 2.9 times its weekend proceeds. We
collected the halt prices sh (Friday morning's prices) and ad-
just prices Sa (2.9 times the actual return) from HSX for 50
movies opening during the period March 3, 2000 to Septem-
ber 1, 2000.
Figure 1 plots the actual box office return
sa/2.9 versus the HSX estimate Sh/2.9 for each movie. We
measure accuracy of the forecasts according to four metrics:

7http://www.ideafutures,tom/
Shttp://www.motorsport, com/compete/p6/
o)


o


..0
80


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0
,
,
,
,
,
,
////


·
//'/
.



·
///"
/i




e_t.t~%*~
moviedata
·
.J~[~ g
best fit
,Jll~",
.
.
.
.
!deal "7.......

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
HSX stock estimate


Figure 1: Accuracy of HSX movie stock forecasts
to predict opening weekend box office returns. The
dashed line corresponds to ideal accuracy; the solid
line is the best linear fit.




(1) correlation between estimate and actual, (2) average ab-
solute error, (3) average percent error, and (4) slope of the
best-fit line to the data. 9 Table 1 reports these error mea-
surements for baseline HSX data. Without any preprocess-
ing (e.g., boosting, filtering, or learning), HSX forecasts are
remarkably accurate. Game players--at least collectively--
appear to be knowledgeable about the prospects of upcom-
ing movies and are sufficiently well-motivated to reveal their
information in the context of the game, even without much
prospect for tangible compensation.
Next, we evaluate HSX predictions of four-week total box
office proceeds. After a movie stock on HSX adjusts (or if it
does not adjust), its price becomes a forecast of the movie's
four-week box office total r4. We gathered the delist prices
r4 and the prices three weeks before delist s3 for 109 movies
between March 3, 2000 to September 1, 2000.
Figure 2
graphs r4 versus s3 for each movie. The correlation is 0.978,
the best-fit line's slope is 1.04, and the average error is 4.01.
The average percent error is undefined (infinite), since a
few small movies apparently did not earn any measurable
amount of money.
We also recorded the forecasts of opening weekend returns
from movie expert Brandon Gray of Box Office Mojo. 1° Ta-
ble 1 compares the accuracy of Box Office Mojo predictions
to HSX predictions. The two forecasts axe of comparable
quality--Box Office Mojo performed 4% better than HSX
in terms of average percent error. In fact, the two sources
make similar errors. Figure 3 plots the correlation between
HSX errors and Box Office Mojo errors. Both sources over-
estimate a larger fraction of movies; but when they do un-
derestimate, they are off by a greater amount. This occurs
because both tend to underestimate the best box office per-

9We employ a standard least-squares regression to obtain
the best-fit line. Since the variance of data increases with
estimate magnitude, a weighted least-squares regression may
be appropriate. Ideally, weights would be inversely propor-
tional to variance [5], but we do not have enough data to
accurately assess variance at each point.
l°http://boxoff icemoj o. com/



176

180

160

140

.~ 120

-~
100

80

o
60

~ 40

20
,
,
,
.
.
.
.
@,
...
/-"/"


4.
.//"
//
·
·
//"


/
·

·
·/,J/


·
/z·




~·
movie_data
·
jW T" ~
best fit
df¢" ~
,
,
ideal ....:......

20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180

HSX stock estimate


Figure 2: Accuracy of HSX movie stock forecasts
to predict four week total box office returns.
The
dashed line corresponds to ideal accuracy; the solid
line is the best linear fit.




Table 1: Accuracy of HSX, Box Office Mojo, and
combined forecasts of opening weekend box office
returns. Accuracy metrics are correlation, average
error, average percent error, and slope of the least-
squares best-fit line.


corr
avg err
HSX
0.940
3.57
BOMojo
0.945
3.31
avg
0.950
3.16
avg-max
0.956
2.90
avg %err
fit
31.5
1.16
27.5
1.10
27.0
1.15
26.6
1.08




formers. The correlation in errors between HSX and Box
Office Mojo is 0.818. The two estimates may result from
overlapping sources of evidence--for example, it is possible
that Brandon Gray observes HSX prices, and/or that some
HSX traders read Box Office Mojo forecasts.
We investigate combining data from HSX and Box Of-
fice Mojo to sharpen predictions. The simplest method--
averaging the two estimates--results in increased correla-
tion, decreased average error, and decreased percent error,
as reported in Table 1. Since both sources underestimate big
box office winners, we tried a second combination procedure
that returns the average of the two forecasts if that average
is less than twenty-five, otherwise returning the maximum
of the two forecasts. This "avg-max" combination gave the
most accurate predictions according to all four metrics (see
Table 1). Figure 4 graphs box office numbers versus this
combined estimate. Without more data, we hesitate to em-
ploy more sophisticated learning and boosting techniques
lest we begin to overfit; on the other hand, given access to
training and test data over a larger time frame, such meth-
ods will likely become warranted.
Combining forecasts works best when individually accu-
rate sources make uncorrelated errors [7]. Since HSX and
Box Office Mojo exhibit dependent errors, the gain from
merging data, while appreciable, is relatively small. Iden-
03
O



8

o

rot
10


5


0


-5


-10


-15
·


-20
-20
i
i
a
i

-15
-10
-5
0
5

HSX error
10



Figure 3: Correlation between HSX opening week-
end forecast errors and Box Office Mojo forecast
errors.




80

70

6O

o
so

~ 40
e~

·~ 30

20

10

0
0
.
.
.
.
.
.
............i.............i
·
/7"




· Jb~·
movie data
·
,=11~,~
best fit
#Jl¥- ·
,
,
,
,
!deal"--........
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

combined (avg-max) HSX and B.O. Mojo estimate


Figure 4: Accuracy of combined HSX and Box Of-
fice Mojo forecasts to predict opening weekend box
office returns. The dashed line corresponds to ideal
accuracy; the solid line is the best linear fit.




177

0,8



~'
0.6

t-,
o
K 0.4


0.2


0
0
'
'
'
I
'
/"//'///'/


............it ..................

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
average price


Figure 5: Accuracy of the HSX award options mar-
ket. Points display observed frequency versus aver-
age normalized price for buckets of similarly-prlced
options.
The dashed line where frequency equals
price corresponds to ideal accuracy.




tifying alternative sources that yield independent forecasts
will be a key component of any data combination strategy.
Some candidate sources to explore include chat board post-
ings, query logs, press coverage, movie reviews, and link
structure on the web.


5.
ENTERTAINMENT AWARD FORECASTS:
HSX AWARD OPTIONS
In the 2000 HSX Oscar options market, as it turns out,
each nominee with the highest final price in its category
did indeed win an Oscar. The Wall Street Journal, amid
controversy, published a poll of actual Academy voters days
before the Oscar awards ceremony; their report correctly
forecasted only seven out of eight winners.
Beyond predicting the most likely winner, we investigate
how accurately HSX award option prices reflect all likeli-
hoods of winning. For example, if prices are accurate, then
among all options with a normalized price of H$0.1, about
one in ten should end up winning. Our accuracy analysis is
similar to that conducted for horse races [1, 30, 32, 33, 35]
and other sports betting markets involving real money. We
collected prices of award options associated with the 2000
Oscars, Grammies, and Emmies, for a total of 135 options.
Grammy options (nine categories) and Emmy options (ten
categories) functioned exactly as Oscar options, though win-
ning Grammy options paid out H$42 instead of H$25.
Prices were recorded just before the markets closed, and
before winners were announced. We sorted the options by
price, and grouped them into six buckets. We placed the
same number of options (16) in every bucket, under the
constraint that every bucket include at least one winning
option. We computed the average normalized price of op-
tions within each bucket, and the observedfrequency within
each bucket, or the number of winning options divided by
the number of options. Figure 5 plots each bucket's observed
frequency versus its average normalized price. If we model
options as independent Bernoulli trials, then, in the limit as
the number of options goes to infinity, completely accurate
prices would imply that bucket points fall on the line y = x,
where observed frequency equals price. Error bars display
95% confidence intervals under the independent Bernoulli
trials assumption. Specifically, the lower error bound is the
0.025 quartile of a Beta distribution corresponding to the
observed number of successes (wins) and trials in the bucket,
and the upper error bound is the 0.975 quantile. The Beta
distribution is the correct posterior distribution over fre-
quency, assuming a uniform prior, n The length of an error
bar decreases as the number of options in the bucket in-
creases.
The independence assumption is an idealization,
since options within a single award category are actually
mutually exclusive. The closeness of fit to the line y = x
can be considered a measure of the accuracy of HSX prices.
We compare HSX prices of Oscar options to reported like-
lihood assessments from five columnists at the Hollywood
Stock Brokerage and Resource (HSBR), 12 a fansite of HSX.
We use the logarithmic scoring rule to rate the market and
the columnists.
The logarithmic score is a proper scoring
rule [36], and is an accepted method of evaluating proba-
bility assessors. When experts are rewarded according to a
proper score, they can maximize their expected return by
reporting their probabilities truthfully. Additionally, more
accurate experts can expect to earn a higher average score
than less competent experts.
Scores are computed sepa-
rately within each award category, then averaged.
Index
the five nominees in a category i = 1, 2, ... , 5. Let wi = 1 if
and only if the ith nominee wins, and wi = 0 otherwise, let
pl,p2,... ,p5 be the market's or columnist's reported prob-
abilities for the five nominees. Then the assessor's score for
5
the current category is In (~i=t wipi). Expert assessments
were reported on February 18, 2000. Table 2 gives the av-
erage scores for the HSX market, the five columnists, and
the consensus of the columnists. Higher scores are better,
with 0 the maximum and negative infinity the minimum.
Only one of the five experts scored appreciably better than
the market on February 18. HSX's score increased almost
continuously from the market's open on February 15 to the
market's close on March 26. By February 19, the market's
score had surpassed all of the scores for all five experts and
for their consensus.


6.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FORE-
CASTS: THE FORESIGHT EXCHANGE
Like HSX award options, FX prices constitute collective
probability assessments of future events. To determine how
accurate these assessment are, we collected historical price
information for all retired (completed) claims as of Septem-
ber 8, 2000. Of these, we retained only the 172 that were
binary (i.e., paid off if and only if some true-or-false event
occurred). We recorded the price of each claim 30 days be-
fore it expired. A total of 161 claims were active for at least
30 days, and thus qualified for this data set.
We sorted
the claims by their 30-day-before-expiration price, grouped
them into six buckets of size 17 (under the constraint that
every bucket contain at least one winning claim), and com-

nNote that the expectation of the Beta distribution, s+l/n+
2, does not coincide precisely with the observed frequency,
s/n, where s is the number of successes and n the number
of trials. However, as n grows, the two measures converge.
12http ://w~;w. hsbr. net/




178

Table 2:
Accuracy of HSX
Oscar forecasts
and
HSBR columnists' forecasts, evaluated according to
average logarithmic score.
Higher (less negative)
scores are better.

forecast source
Feb 18 HSX prices
Feb 19 HSX prices
Tom
Jen
John
Fielding
DPRoberts
columnist consensus
avg log score
-1.08
-0.854
-1.08
-1.25
-1.22
-1.04
-0.874
-1.05




0.8



>" 0.6



0.4
..,./'"




0.2


0
i
i
i
i
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

average price


Figure 6: Accuracy of the Foresight Exchange mar-
ket.
Prices are 30 days before claim expiration.
Points display observed frequency versus average
price.
The dashed line corresponds to ideal accu-
racy.




puted the average price and observed frequency for each
bucket.
Figure 6 graphs the results. Prices correlate well with ob-
served outcome frequencies. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals based on the assumption that claims are indepen-
dent Bernoulli trials with a uniform prior over frequency.


7.
FORMULA ONE FORECASTS: F1P6
The reward structure in the F1P6 competition is quite dif-
ferent than in HSX, FX, or the F1 betting market. Correctly
predicting an improbable event yields no more points than
correctly predicting a likely event. One might expect that
competitors would consistently choose the six most probable
winners. But this strategy may not always be optimal. By
choosing only the best drivers, a participant is not likely to
differentiate himself or herself from the pack (unless every-
one reasons this way). For example, Kaplan and Garstka
[19] show that, under some conditions, picking the top seeds
in an NCAA basketball tournament pool does not always
maximize the chances of winning. Moreover, when no money
is involved, a player may not gain much sense of accomplish-
0.7




0"6t
F1P6Prediction of M~chael Schumacher aS winner




·
,
,
0
0
·
0
·
·O




1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
12
13 14
15 16 17
1999Race


Figure 7: For each race in 1999, the fraction of F1P6
participants that predicted Michael Schumacher to
win.
Dots near the top of the chart indicate the
races that he actually competed in.




ment when he or she simply picks the top six drivers, even
if he or she does win. Thus, the nature of the competition
may induce some strategic incentives to carefully pick a few
upsets.
Individuals in the competition are not always fully in-
formed and rational. For example, when one of the best
drivers--Michael Schumacher--was absent from some races
due to injury, several of the F1P6 players continued to pick
him to win. Figure 7 shows the races that Schumacher com-
peted in during 1999, and the fraction of participants that
predicted him to win. The observed behavior may be due
to a lack of information, or because players skip races, in
which case their previous predictions are carried over. How-
ever, carry-over occurs only once.
Although individuals clearly make faulty predictions, we
examine whether collective information in the game is suffi-
cient to yield accurate overall predictions. We obtained the
predictions of all F1P6 participants from the competition
web site for 32 of 41 races held from 1999 through June 10,
2001.13 Unlike the other two games investigated, F1P6 does
not contain a natural "price" statistic that summarizes the
consensus of opinions of all participants. In an attempt to
identify a good summary statistic, we tried four different
ways of scoring the drivers according to the participants'
predictions.

· linear scoring (6-5-4-3-2-1)

· Fl-style scoring (10-6-4-3-2-1)14

· fiat scoring (1-1-1-1-1-1)

· winner scoring (1-0-0-0-0-0)

laData for the remaining 9 races was missing.
14We call this "F1 style" scoring because F1 drivers accumu-
late points toward their season championship according to
the same scheme. Also, FIP6 players receive points in this
manner.




179

t
/
//
/////



0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.4


0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
i

0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
'
f
//"/"
///-/"

/,//..///"
///"
j/l"
c


t:T


"o


(D


o




average score


Figure 8: Accuracy of the F1P6 competition. Points
display observed frequency versus linear score. The
dashed line corresponds to ideal accuracy.




"o


Q)


o
0,4


0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0
0.05
0.1
/ / j,"'//
j/"




i
i
i
i
i

0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35

average score
0.4



Figure 9: Observed frequency versus Fl-style score.




For example, linear scoring assigns to a driver six points for
every F1P6 participant that predicts that driver to finish in
first place, five points for every participant that predicts the
driver to finish in second, and so on. We normalized drivers'
scores to obtain a pseudo-probability associated with each
scoring rule.
We collected the actual race results from Atlas F1 ~5 and
Gale Force F1. ~8 We sorted driver-races by score, grouped
them into buckets of constant size, and computed the av-
erage scores and observed frequencies in all buckets.
To
control against data snooping, we performed an initial anal-
ysis on the 1999 races only. On this data, linear scoring per-
formed best, with Fl-style scoring a close second; flat scoring
and winner scoring performed poorly. The remainder of re-
sults in this section refer to all races from 1999 through June
10, 2001. Figure 8 plots the bucket points obtained from lin-
ear scoring. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals, under
the independent Bernoulli trials assumption. The figure in-
dicates that linear scores are good estimates of the actual
frequencies of race outcomes. Figure 9 shows the accuracy
of Fl-style scoring; this method also appears to yield ac-
curate psuedo-probabilities. Figures 10 and 11 display the
same plots for flat scoring and winner scoring, respectively;
neither of these scoring methods perform well. These results
are consistent with our initial 1999-only analysis, providing
a measure of confidence that results are robust.
In the case of F1 racing, we have access to a real-money
market--namely the F1 betting market--that naturally lends
itself to comparison with the F1P6 game results. We col-
lected archive betting odds from Atlas F1 for 39 of 41 races
held from 1999 through June 10, 2001./~ The odds do not
reflect a balanced market, since gamblers can only bet for
a particular driver, not against. In order to ensure a profit,
bookmakers purposefully set the odds such that the corre-
sponding probabilities sum to greater than one. We found

15http://atlasfl.com/
16http://galeforcefl.com/
ZTAs ofthis writing, archive odds ~omthemost recent two
races were not publicly available ~omAtlasF1.
ET"


"10
(1)




O
0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
//"
// /j'J/"
/j,'/
///
/.
.I/




i
i

0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4

average score


Figure 10: Observed frequency versus fiat score.




0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1
o>,
f::

¢T




2=
o




,//i.//'*'//
///,.*/J
Ij j
j/
.//


t
//.
/i
//
i///.. ''//'1
../
i
i
0.1
0.2
i
i
i

0
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

average score


Figure 11: Observed frequency versus winner score.




180

0
0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25


0.2


0.15


0.1

0.05

0
0
t/°..""/""t'"""
/"




.t.. -'/''*
.
i
i
i

0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
i
i
i
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4

average score


Figure 12: Accuracy of the bookmaker odds from
Atlas F1. Points display observed frequency versus
normalized odds.




Table
3:
Accuracy of psuedo-probabilities
from
FIP6 and normalized odds from Atlas FI~ evaluated
according to average logarithmic score. Higher (less
negative) scores are better.


forecast source
FIP6 linear scoring
FIP6 Fl-style scoring
F1P6 flat scoring
F1P6 winner scoring
Atlas F1 normalized odds
avg log score
-1.84
-1.82
-2.03
-2.32
-1.86




the average excess probability to be 0.23. We normalized
the odds, although it is possible that bookmakers overstate
probabilities in some nonlinear way. There are some sym-
metric gambles available, where bettors choose which of two
drivers will fare better. These bets had smaller excess prob-
abilities (about 0.05), but there were not enough to deter-
mine probabilities across the entire field of drivers. Again,
we sorted by probability (normalized odds), binned the data
(in buckets of constant size), and computed average proba-
bility and observed frequency. Figure 12 graphs the results
along with 95% confidence error bars.
Table 3 compares the average logarithmic score for the
four types of F1P6 psuedo-probabilities and for the F1 bet-
ting odds, computed over the 30 races for which our data
sets overlap. Perhaps surprisingly, Fl-style scoring and lin-
ear scoring outperformed the official odds, if only slightly.
Note, however, that the bookmaker odds may be purpose-
fully biased in a nonlinear fashion.
It is interesting to note that the pattern of results for
Fl-style scoring (Figure 9) is very similar to that for the
betting odds (Figure 12). Ideally, we would like a model of
prediction strategies [19] and race outcomes that explains
why Fl-style scoring mimics the odds, why Fl-style and
linear scoring yield good predictions, and why the other two
scoring methods fail. At this point, however, we have not
formalized any explanations.
We tested only four scoring rules among a class of six
dimensional weighted averaging rules, in part to avoid over-
fitting our limited data. With more training and test data,
learning the vector of weights, or learning other functional
mappings from F1P6 votes to psuedo-probabilities, begins
to make sense.
One might also explore combining F1P6
and betting odds data, or combining with data from other
games, web sites, or other sources.


8.
DATA MINING FROM ONLINE GAMES:
IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
A growing number of games and markets on the web pro-
vide vast amounts of data reflecting the interactions of mil-
lions of people around the world.
Each source offers the
opportunity to infer something about the players involved
and the knowledge they possess. Data mining algorithms--
typically fast algorithms for extracting knowledge from mas-
sive quantities of data [8, 28]--seem particularly well suited
for the job. In this work, we employed simple extraction al-
gorithms to obtain probabilistic forecasts of real-world events.
Our results can be seen as statistical validation of the un-
derlying quality of data from online games.
The games
themselves appear to serve as a mechanism for collecting,
merging, and cleaning data from human experts, naturally
handling some of the more difficult steps in a typical data
mining application [4, 20]. Yet we expect room for improve-
ment with the use of more sophisticated algorithms and data
fusion techniques.
For example, with access to user-specific data, predic-
tions could be improved by weighting users according to
inferred measures of reliability or expertise, filtering out
"noisy" users, and identifying and removing users attempt-
ing to manipulate the game. Game forecasts could also be
boosted with information from outside sources. For exam-
ple, baseline HSX box office predictions could benefit from
additional data from expert forecasts, statistical sampling,
critical reviews, actor popularity, advertising budgets, num-
ber of screens playing, discussion boards, newsgroups, search
queries [2], distribution of inbound hyperlinks pointing to
movie homepages, web community sizes [9], etc.
More detailed analysis of game dynamics can actually lead
to algorithms for identifying and pinpointing the introduc-
tion of new knowledge into the public consciousness. For
example, in August 1996, the rapid increase in the price of
a bet on FX that extraterrestrial life will be discoveredis can
be traced to news at the time that fossils were potentially
identified in a Martian meteorite [21]. Similarly, two sequen-
tial decreases in the price of a bet on the (real-money) Iowa
Electronic Market that Rudy Giuliani will win the 2000 US
Senate election in New York can be correlated with two an-
nouncements during his campaign: first that he had prostate
cancer, and later that he was dropping out of the race.
In non-market games like FIP6, generating probabilistic
forecasts requires more explicit data manipulation, since a
natural price statistic is not available. In this paper, we tried
weighted voting procedures as a first step, finding that a lin-
ear combination seems to work well, though more advanced
machine learning and data mining techniques are certainly
applicable. Additionally, with a model of how people play
the game [19], one can infer the maximum likelihood opin-
ion of each user, then combine results using known belief or

ZShttp ://www. ideosphere ·com/~x-bin/Claim?claim=XLif




181

forecast aggregation methods [3, 15].
Inevitably, multiple sites will focus on interrelated topics,
and extraction algorithms will benefit from combining data
sources while accounting for correlations. More general on.-
line communities, for example chat boards or newsgroups,
feature some of the same benefits as game sites--namely
dedicated and knowledgeable participants often willing to
divulge information--though leveraging this more free-form
data will require more complex processing algorithms.
An obvious path for applications is to mine information
from existing games. Alternatively, organizations may set
up their own online games as a mechanism for gathering
data on particular subjects of interest or concern, perhaps
as an alternative to costly market research [16]. While Inter-
net polls are notoriously skewed toward an unrepresentative
(more educated, more wealthy, more conservative) demo-
graphic, it appears that web games actually benefit from
the bias within their niche audiences.
Perhaps the differ-
ence arises because, while polls typically ask questions of the
form "what do you want?", these games pose questions of
the form "what do you think will happen?" to an attentive
and knowledgeable audience. However, if corporations be-
gin to take game data seriously, players may feel wary about
privacy issues and what information they are revealing for
free and to whom. Moreover, once data is being used for
consequential decisions, incentives to manipulate the ganm
increase, and good mechanisms for filtering or controlling
manipulation will be essential.


9.
CONCLUSION
The World Wide Web fosters large-scale group activities
of all sorts, from competing in games, to trading in markets,
to competing in market trading games. We find that, beyond
their entertainment and commercial value, these sites can
be valuable resources for inferring predictions about real-
world events.
We show that HSX prices are informative
signals for movie box office results and entertainment award
outcomes--as accurate or more accurate than expert opin-
ions. FX prices reliably forecast true outcome frequencies for
scientific and societal questions. The combined judgments of
F1P6 competitors are equally or better aligned with actual
race outcomes than the official betting odds.
In both economics [24] and decision science [6, 36] it is
known that appropriate monetary reward structures can in-
duce people to reveal their inside information and expert
knowledge. Our results provide evidence that well-designed
games also provide sufficient incentives for people to divulge
their information. In this context, the players' motivations
derive from their competitive spirit and the value of enter-
tainment, rather than directly from consumable (e.g., mone-
tary) compensation. In all three games studied, participants
appear to be (collectively) knowledgeable, and to take win-
ning seriously enough to reveal that knowledge indirectly
through their play.
Such online games act as a sink ~br
specialized information from experts.
We believe that, in
contrast to the low signal-to-noise ratio on web as a whole,
many online games are good sources for targeted mining of
pertinent and useful data.


10.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yan Chen, Gary Flake, Robin Hanson, Chris
Meek, Forrest Nelson, Melissa Perrot, William Walsh, Mike
Wellman, and the anonymous reviewers for advice, encour-
agement, insightful comments, and pointers to related work.
Thanks to Eric Glover for research and programming as-
sistance.
Thanks to James Pancoast and "Jimmy Impos-
sible" from the Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
(http://www.hsbr.nel;/),
a fansite of HSX; Ken Kittlitz
from the Foresight Exchange; Paul Winalski and John Fran-
cis from the F1P6 competition; and Jo~o Panlo Lopes da
Cumba from the Formula One Results and Information eX-
plorer (http ://wWW.forix, corn/).

11.
REFERENCES
[1] M. M. All. Probability and utility estimates for
racetrack bettors. Journal of Political Economy,
85(4):803-816, 1977.
[2] D. Beeferman and A. Berger. Agglomerative clustering
of a search engine query log. In Sixth International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 407-416, 2000.
[3] R. T. Clemen. Combining forecasts: A review and
annotated bibliography. International Journal of
Forecasting, 5:559-583, 1989.
[4] W. W. Cohen, H. Kautz, and D. McAllester.
Hardening soft information sources. In Sixth
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 255-259, 2000.
[5] Weighted least sum of squares regression. In
C. Croarkin, P. Tobias, and W. Guthrie, editors,
NIST/SEMATECH Engineering Statistics Internet
Handbook.
http ://www. itl. nist. gov/div898/handbook/pmd/
section1/pmd143, him.
[6] B. de Finetti. Theory of Probability: A Critical
Introductory Treatment, volume 1. Wiley, New York,
1974.
[7] T. G. Dietterich. Machine learning research: Four
current directions. Artificial Intelligence Magazine,
18(4):97-136, 1997.
[8] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth.
Knowledge discovery and data mining: Towards a
unifying framework. In Second International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
1996.
[9] G. W. Flake, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles. Efficient
identification of web communities. In Sixth
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 150-160, 2000.
[10] R. Forsythe and R. Lundholm. Information
aggregation in an experimental market. Econometrica,
58(2):309-347, 1990.
[11] R. Forsythe, F. Nelson, G. R. Neumann, and
J. Wright. Anatomy of an experimental political stock
market. American Economic Review, 82(5):1142-1161,
1992.
[12] R. Forsythe, T. A. Rietz, and T. W. Ross. Wishes,
expectations, and actions: A survey on price formation
in election stock markets. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 39:83-110, 1999.
[13] S. French. Group consensus probability distributions:
A critical survey. Bayesian Statistics, 2:183-202, 1985.
[14] J. M. Gandar, W. H. Dare, C. R. Brown, and R. A.
Zuber. Informed traders and price variations in the




182

betting market for professional basketball games.
Journal of Finance, LIII(1):385-401, 1998.
[15] C. Genest and J. V. Zidek. Combining probability
distributions: A critique and an annotated
bibliography. Statistical Science, 1(1):114-148, 1986.
[16] R. D. Hackathorn. Web Farming for the Data
Warehouse: Exploiting Business Intelligence and
Knowledge Management. Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
[17] R. Hanson. Decision markets. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 14(3):16-19, 1999.
[18] R. D. Hanson. Could gambling save science?
Encouraging an honest consensus. Social
Epistemology, 9(1):3-33, 1995.
[19] E. H. Kaplan and S. J. Garstka. March Madness and
the office pool. Management Science, 47(3):369-382,
2001.
[20] M. L. Lee, W. Ling, and W. L. Low. Intelliclean: A
knowledge-based intelligent data cleaner. In Sixth
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 290-294~ 2000.
[21] D. S. McKay, E. K. G. Jr., K. L. Thomas-Keprta,
H. Vali, C. S. Romanek, S. J. Clemett, X. D. F.
Chillier, C. R. Maechling, and R. N. Zare. Search for
past life on Mars: Possible relic biogenic activity in
Martian meteorite alh84001. Science, 273:924-930,
Aug. 1996.
[22] D. M. Pennock, S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and F. /~.
Nielsen. The power of play: Efficiency and forecast
accuracy in web market games. Technical Report
2000-168, NEC Research Institute, 2000.
[23] D. M. Pennock, S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and F. A.
Nielsen. The real power of artificial markets. Science,
291:987-988, February 9 2001.
[24] C. R. Plott. Markets as information gathering tools.
Southern Economic Journal, 67(1):1-15, 2000.
[25] C. R. Plott and S. Sunder. Efficiency of experimental
security markets with insider information: An
application of rational-expectations models. Journal of
Political Economy, 90(4):663-98, 1982.
[26] C. R. Plott and S. Sunder. Rational expectations and
the aggregation of diverse information in laboratory
security markets. Econometrica, 56(5):1085-1118,
1988.
[27] C. R. Plott, J. Wit, and W. C. Yang. Parimutuel
betting markets as information aggregation devices:
experimental results. Technical Report Social Science
Working Paper 986, California Institute of
Technology, Apr. 1997.
[28] F. Provost and V. Kolluri. A survey of methods for
scaling up inductive algorithms. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 3(2):131-169, 1999.
[29] P. Resnick and H. R. Varian. Recommender systems.
Communications of the ACM, 40(3):56-58, 1997.
[30] R. N. Rosett. Gambling and rationality. Journal of
Political Economy, 73(6):595-607, 1965.
[31] B. J. Sherrick, P. Garcia, and V. Tirupattur.
Recovering probabilistic information from options
markets: Tests of distributional assumptions. Journal
of Futures Markets, 16(5):545-560, 1996.
[32] W. W. Snyder. Horse racing: testing the efficient
markets model. Journal of Finance, 33(4):1109-1118,
1978.
[33] R. H. Thaler and W. T. Ziemba. Anomalies:
Parimutuel betting markets: Racetracks and lotteries.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2(2):161-174, 1988.
[34] D. A. Wasserman. More than enough answers to
questions nobody asked about F1Pick6, 1996.
http ://www. freenet, edmonton, ab. ca/-davidwss/
flp6anal, pdf.
[35] M. Weitzman. Utility analysis and group behavior:
An empirical study. Journal of Political Economy,
73(1):18-26, 1965.
[36] R. L. Winkler and A. H. Murphy. Good probability
assessors. J. Applied Meteorology, 7:751-758, 1968.




183

