WAPS, a Data Mining Support Environment
for the Planning of
Warranty
and Goodwill Costs in the Automobile Industry

E. Hotz and G.Nakhaeizadeh
DaimlerChrysler
AG
Research & Technology
3
P.O.Box 2360,89013
Ulm
49-0731-5052860

{edgar.hotz,rheza.nakhaeizadeh)Qdaimlerchlysler.com


ABSTRACT
WAPS (WArranty Planning System) is a Data Mining support
environment which is developed within a cooperation between
DaimlerChrysler Research& Technology, Ulm andthe Salesand
ServicesDirection, Stuttgart.DataMining modelling is performed
in WAPS by using an innovative approachbasedon regression
analysistaking into accountthe structural changeof warranty and
goodwill costs data. In this paper, we describe the different
developmentphasesof WAPS.
KEYWORDS
DataMining, regressionanalysis,structuralchange

1. IMPORTANCE
OF WARRANTY
AND
GOODWILL
COST PREDICTION
The warranty planning in the automobileindustry is characterized
by severalby problems:
the needto calculateplanning figures for cashreserveswithin
the balance causedby legal or voluntary obIigations in the
contextof warranty andgoodwill
a growing number of actually manufacturedvehicles and a
growing number of production plants all over the world,
resulting into a more complex and mulitlayered production
structure
a different warranty and goodwill policy for different sales
markets.
The systemWAPS, that is the result of a joint project between
DaimlerChrysler Research & Technology and the Sales and
ServicesDirection, should masterthe businessneedsdescribed
above.It coversthe warranty cost forecastfor nine passengercar
serieswhich areactually under production andfour passengercar
serieswhose production has run out. However, thesefour series
still causewarranty and goodwill costs.To have a picture about
the complexity of theproblem,it should bementionedthat in each
planning period (3 times for each budget year) WAPS delivers


Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work fol
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed Ibr profit or commercial advantage and that
copies hear this notice and the full citation on the lirst page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on scrvcrs or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
KDD-!W San Diego CA USA
Copyright ACM 1999 l-58113-l43-7/99/08...$5.00
B. Petzsche and H. Spiegelberger
DaimlerChtysler
AG
Sales and Services Direction, Stuttgart
70546 Stuttgart
49-071 l-l 722272

(bernd.petzsche,hans.spiegelberger}@daimlerchrysler.com


prediction costsfor totally 520 separatesegmentscausedby the
following factors:

l
13 passengercar series(5 seriesfor the S-Class,2 for the E-
Class,4 for the C-Class, 1 for the A-Class and 1 for the M-
Class
l
5 vehicle body versions (limousine, station wagon, coupe,
cabriolet,roadster)
l
2 typesof engine(petrol andDiesel engine)
l
4 sales markets for the series (Germany, Europe, USA,
Restof World)

Up to now the warrantycostprediction hasbeenrealizedby using
a conventional planning methodbasedon the amountof warranty
andgoodwill costsobservedin the last budgetyear.This amount
is modified by information available aboutthe expectedinflation,
aboutthe quality index of the vehicles andaboutthe development
of the salesfigures for the different vehicle series.Someof this
information is rather qualitative than quantitative requiring the
additional expertknowledgeto estimatethe effectson the amount
of the budget. This is a complicatedprocedurethat takesabout
four weeks for each planning period and requires involving
different expertsfrom severaldepartments.
Regardingthe fact that an enormousdatastock storedabout the
vehicles and their behaviour in the context of warranty and
goodwill costsis available,the questioncomingup waswhetherit
is possible to use Data Mining technology and construct an
automaticprediction tool basedonly on historical datawhich are
available for the warranty andgoodwill costs.This has led to the
systemWAPSthat will bedescribedin the next sections.
After some discussion with the end users, it was decided to
implement a systemthat, in contrastto the traditional approach,
should use as input only the historical data on warranty costs.
Furthermore,the systemshouldhavethe following properties:

l
it shouldreducetheplanning time
l
standardizationof the planning processfor eachvehicle series
l
high scale of automation for the warranty and goodwill
planning process
l
providing information about the general quality of vehicle
series,their body versions and their motor variants in the
different salesmarketsaroundthe world




417

2. STRUCTURE
OF
THE
AVAILABLE
DATA
In this section we discuss the structure and source of the data
relevant for the analysisand prediction of warranty and goodwill
costs.The available historical dataabout warranty costsis a part
of the databaseQUIS (Quality and Information System)that can
be consideredasakind of datawarehousecontaining information
on producedvehicles andtheir damages.The fundamentof QUIS
is a normalized databasemodel including more than fifty tables
with morethan 400fields. Themostextensivetable containsmore
than 110 million rows. Figure 1 describesthe processenviron-
mentof datagenerationanddatacollection for QUIS.

production plant
n
repairworkshops
lF3
vehicle dam
technical data
1
damageparts


f-l
l
Parts

n
testing
WCllTanty
andgood-
will claims

commercialdata



Warrant)
data
rclaims
claim processing


Figure 1. process environment of data generation for QUIS


3. DATA PREPROCESSING
TheDataMining task neededto implementWAFS is aprediction
task. To implement the appropriate prediction model, it was
necessaryto selectin a first stepthe right input attributes.Thereis
ahugenumberof possiblevariableswhich could beconsideredas
appropriate attributes for the Data Mining model. The classical
statistical approacheslike correlation analysis or factor analysis
were not applicable in a reasonable time. To reduce the
complexity of the searchspace,we had extensivediscussionswith
the end users resulting in choosing the so-called warrun@ and
goodwill rate (WG-Rate)asa basefor model attributes.The WG-
Rate describesthe averagecost per vehicle sold within a certain
salesmarket.This rate is generally calculated for eachmonth of
production andcomprisesall realizedcostscausedby the repair or
replacement of failed or damagedvehicle parts. Each rate is
related to a certain operating time of the vehicle. The operating
time is divided into specific operating intervals. The used
intervals in WAPShavethe lengths of 3,6,9, 12,15 etc.months.
Figure 2 gives an example for the developmentof warranty and
goodwill ratesover 3 production years.
The secondstepwas to extract the neededattributes of QUIS by
using appropriatedatabasequeriesin order to calculatethe WG-
Ratesin a further step.Each vehicle seriesrequirestwo different
queries, one for the general vehicle data and one for the
commercialdatageneratedin the systemVEGA accordingto the
warranty andgoodwill claims of the repair workshops(seeFigure
1).




Figure 2. development of a WG-Rate over 3 production years
The raw datageneratedin the secondstep are usedto calculate
WG-Ratesasattributevaluesfor the prediction model. In addition
to this raw data we need other input data as well which are
processedin athird stepby alargeVisual Basic module within an
ACCESS-database:
> handling of missingvaluesandbadquality data
> updateof the product structureof passengercars,the structure
of manufacturingplantsandthe structureof salesmarkets
p integration of the latest planned production figures for the
different vehicle seriesand their structuredescribedin section
1
> actualizing tables that contain the exchange rates USDiDM
andUSD/EUROin dealingwith the neededforeign currencies
> calculation of the numerous different WG-Rates for the
product structure described in section 1 by considering the
distribution of the car registration numbersfor eachmonth of
production
> calculation of correctionfactorsfor the WG-Rates
> call of a Visual Basic module within Microsoft EXCEL that
containsthe implementationof the chosenprediction model
After someinitial trials we have distinguished that somespecial
refinements of the input data for the prediction models would
increasethe prediction performance:
1. Replacement of the production date by the date of car
registrationto calculatethe WG-Rates
2. Construction of correction factors for the WG-Rates to
eliminate the effect of the time lag betweenthe dateof repair
andrecorddateof the damageandcostdatain QUIS

4. PREDICTION
MODELS
Besides the statistical approaches like regression analysis,
regressionand model trees, SMART, Naive Bayes etc. one can
use also alternative approachesbasedon neural networks. After
someinitial trials we have selectedthe regressionanalysis as a
representative for the statistical approaches and a Back-
propagation network as a representativefor neural approaches.




418

The selectionof the regressionapproachwassupportedby the fact
that earlier investigations have shown that methods like time
series analysis lead to very poor prediction quality for the
warranty andgoodwill costbudget,asdescribedin [2].
The next step was to design an evaluation plan to comparethe
both alternatives and to select the best one. The following
measureswere chosen as criteria for the evaluation of the
prediction performanceof thesetwo models:

l
Mean Absolute PercentageError (MAPE)
l
StandardDeviation (STDV)
l
Theil's U
The input variables for both modelswere WG-Ratesin the early
andthe targetvariableswereWG-Ratesin the later operatingtime
of vehicles.
The evaluation in the testing time has shown that there is no
significant difference betweenthe prediction performanceof two
alternative approaches if we use STDV and Theil's U as
comparison criteria. Using of MAPE (one example of the
performanceof the two approachesis given in figure 3), however,
hasled to the fact that almostfor all vehicle seriesthe regression
analysisis the favorite model.




+
MAPE-REG




I
WG-Rates for different vehicle operating times


Figure 3. prediction
performance
for WG-Rates comparing
the regression
analysis
model with
the neural
network approach by use of the MAPE criterion
Concerning theseresults and the fact that regressionanalysis is
easierto implement in comparisonto a neural network approach
we have decided to select the regression model for further
consideration. This model was however refined in further steps.
Especially, we have tried to capture the dynamic aspectsand
structural changesof the WG-Ratesby refining the regression
model. This can be consideredas an innovative approachin the
implementation of WAPS. For details of the implementation of
structural changeswithin a regressionanalysismodel, we refer to
VI.
WAPScantestnow if astructuralchangehasoccurredin thepast.
If it is the case,insteadto fit a unique regressionmodel over the
whole time, the system switches to a piecewise regression
approach taking into account the structural changeby dividing
the whole time spaceinto severalsubspaces.

5. DEPLOYMENT
OF WAPS
During its developmentin the past two years, WAPS has been
usedbesidesthe conventional planning methodin orderto testits
practicability in prediction of the total annualbudgetfor warranty
and goodwill in the passengercar section. The results were very
promising.Theneededplanning time is 75% shorterthan the time
usingthe conventionalmethod.Figure 4 showsan exampleof the
performanceof the two approachesfor the planning years 1997
and 1998.It can be seenthat the absolutepercentagedeviation
betweenthe predictedand realized warranty costsis lower using
WAPS.


Absolute percentagedeviation of realized expenses
from planned budget for warranty and goodwill
costsfor onepassengercar serie



1
WAPS
H conventional method 1




6 planning datesfor the years 1997and 1998



Figure 4. comparison of WAPS with the conventional planning
method for one passenger car series
During its development,we could convince the usersthat WAPS
is not only ableto supportthe planning processfor warranty and
goodwill costs and to provide additional security for the
calculated planning figures, but it is able also to support the
calculation of the amount of balancecash reservesfor warranty
and goodwill obligations in considerable shorter time. In this
connection,the fmal version of WAPS which is implementedin
Visual Basic for PC, is in use in the Sales and Services
Departmentof DaimlerChryslerin Stuttgart.
WAPS has an open architecture which allows to implement
further prediction models, e.g. models that can perform the
reliability analysis of vehicle parts with high warranty and
goodwill costs.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to expressour deepgratitude to the colleaguesof
the departmentVSE/PG within the Salesand ServicesDirection
of DaimlerChrysler in Stuttgart for the generous and trustful
cooperationduring the developmentof WAPS.

7. REFERENCES
[l]
Chatterjee and Price. Regression Analysis in Practice,
OldenbourgVerlag, 1995.
[2] Legner, C. Prediction of Warranty and Goodwill costs,
Institute for Statistics and Mathematical Economic Theory,
University of Karlsruhe, 1995.30-61




419

