Collaborative Crawling: Mining User Experiences for
Topical Resource Discovery

Charu C. Aggarwal
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

charu @ us.ibm.com


ABSTRACT

The rapid growth of the world wide web had made the prob-
lem of topic specific resource discovery an important one in
recent years. In this problem, it is desired to find web pages
which satisfy a predicate specified by the user. Such a pred-
icate could be a keyword query, a topical query, or some ar-
bitrary contraint. Several techniques such as focussed crawl-
ing and intelligent crawling have recently been proposed for
topic specific resource discovery. All these crawlers are link-
age based, since they use the hyperlink behavior in order to
perform resource discovery. Recent studies have shown that
the topical correlations in hyperlinks are quite noisy and
may not always show the consistency necessary for a reliable
resource discovery process. In this paper, we will approach
the problem of resource discovery from an entirely different
perspective; we will mine the significant browsing patterns
of world wide web users in order to model the likelihood of
web pages belonging to a specified predicate. This user be-
havior can be mined from the freely available traces of large
public domain proxies on the world wide web. We refer to
this technique as collaborative crawling because it mines the
collective user experiences in order to find topical resources.
Such a strategy is extremely effective because the topical
consistency in world wide web browsing patterns turns out
to very reliable. In addition, the user-centered crawling sys-
tem can be combined with linkage based systems to create
an overall system which works more effectively than a sys-
tem based purely on either user behavior or hyperlinks.


1. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid growth of the world wide web, the problem
of resource collection on the world wide web has become
very relevant in the past few years. Users may often wish to
search or index collections of documents based on topical or
keyword queries. Consequently, a number of search engine
technologies such as Lycos and AltaVista have flourished in
recent years.
A significant method proposed recently for automated re-




Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the firstpage. Tocopy otherwise, to
republish, to post on serversor to redistributeto lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGKDD'02 Edmonton,Alberta, Canada
Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113-567-X/02/0007 ...$5.00.
source discovery is the technique of focused crawling [4]. The
essential idea in focused crawling is that there is a short
range topical locality on the web. This locality may be used
in order to design effective techniques for resource discov-
ery by starting at a few well chosen points and maintain-
ing the crawler within the ranges of these known topics. A
recent paper discusses the application of learning method-
ologies [3] in order to improve the effectiveness of the crawl.
While the focussed crawling technique is designed for find-
ing web pages belonging to one of the classes from a hierar-
chically arranged topical collection, the intelligent crawling
technique is capable of more flexible and arbitrary predicates
such as a combination of different kinds of topical queries,
keyword queries or other constraints on the content or meta-
information about the web page such as its URL domain.
Both the focussed crawling and intelligent crawling meth-
ods [3, 4] use only linkage based information in order to find
topical resources. In the former case, the linkage based in-
formation is used directly under the assumption that web
pages show topical locality, whereas in the latter case, a
learning process is used to identify the most suitable web
pages. It is this learning process of the intelligent crawling
technique which provides it with the flexibility and robust-
ness necessary to collect web pages belonging to arbitrary
predicates.
In many cases, links are quite noisy in terms of topical
locality. Such links may correspond to banners, advertise-
ments and other content which do not carry specific in-
formation about resource discovery. Often advertisements,
banners and such content dominate the resource structure
of many web sites even though they are only occasionally
browsed by users. In addition, since the web continues to
grow rapidly in a unstructured fashion through the efforts
of millions of non-collaborating users, it is difficult for a sin-
gle linkage model to completely capture the complex and
unstructured variation in hyperlink patterns.
This paper will therefore diverge significantly from linkage-
based methodologies, and instead concentrate on utilizing
the browsing patterns of users on the web in order to mine
significant patterns.
We will achieve this goal by utilizing
the logs of user access behavior on public domain proxies.
An example of such a public-domain proxy is the Squid [5]
proxy cache, which is a set of large hierarchical caches on
the web which is capable of improving the latency perfor-
mances of different geographical regions.
The access pat-
terns of these systems are representative of a large sample
of world wide web clients.
The utilization of user behavior turns out to be quite use-




423

ful in practice, since even for specific topics there are often
hundreds of thousands of documents, and the size of these
collections continues to grow and change every day.
The
browsing behavior of the users often reflects the changing
trends on the world wide web quite effectively, since the
user behavior mirrors the changes in the world wide web
structure quite well. On the other hand, hyperlinks are fre-
quently outdated and do not adapt quickly to changes in the
documents on the web. Consequently, a linkage based sys-
tem may often spend a fraction of its time trying to access
web pages which no longer exist, whereas a recent trace will
usually contain only those web pages which are accessible.
(Inaccessible web pages would typically be contained in the
error log.)
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
we discuss the general framework for the crawler, and the
factors which may be used for the purpose of self-learning.
In section 3, we will provide an overview of the statistical
model which is used for the purpose of the crawling. Section
4 discusses the empirical results, and the conclusions and
summary axe discussed in section 5.


2.
COLLABORATIVE CRAWLING
The collaborative crawler assumes that multiple users browse
the web through proxy gateways, which generate web traces
containing the access information of the users.
We note
that such gateways may often serve thousands of users; con-
sequently, the web logs generated are often quite huge even
on a daily basis. The collaborative crawling method is im-
plemented as a learning system which identifies the impor-
tance of different users during the crawling process in order
to bias the crawl towards those web pages which are most
likely to belong to the predicate. Specifically the character-
istics of the web pages together with the browsing behavior
of the users are learned by the collaborative crawler in order
to estimate their likelihood of satisfying the predicate.
An important aspect of most web logs is that they often
do not contain individual user information but simply the
domain names of the accesses.
Since some of the domain
names are actually proxy accesses from large groups of users
rather than individuals, this reduces the level of granularity
of the available data. Some simple processing can however
improve the quality of the trace:
 All source IP addresses which occurred in a larger num-
ber of accesses than a given threshold 1 were removed. This
filtered out a large fraction of group accesses.  The above
criterion was also used for shorter periods of time such as a
1 minute interval. If there were more than a certain num-
ber 2 of accesses per unit of time from the same source IP
address, then this was indicative of group behavior.
The above preprocessing steps would still result in many
IP addresses corresponding to groups of users rather than
individuals.
However, our primary aim is to discover re-
sources rather than user behavior, and as long as there was
considerable correlation between the source IP address and

1We picked a threshold depending upon the number of days
that it represented.
Our threshold was 2000 accesses per
day. The assumption was that only. large groups of people
could make so many accesses in a given day.
2We used 100 accesses per minute as the threshold.
The
reason for this high threshold is that multiple access entries
in the trace may actually correspond to the different parts
(images, frames and html) of the same user access.
access content, we did not consider this to be a serious lim-
itation. For the rest of the paper, we will stillrefer to a
source IP address as a user for the purpose of conceptual
abstraction.
The crawler is implemented as an iterativesearch algo-
rithm which always maintains a set of candidate web pages
together with corresponding priorities.These prioritiesare
determined by relatingthe statisticalbehavior of the crawled
web pages to the users that have accessed them. Each time
a web page is crawled, it is determined whether or not it
satisfiesthe predicate. The statisticalbehavior of the users
that have accessed this web page is utilizedto update the
priorities of the candidate web pages. The crawler keeps
track of the nodes which it has already visited,as well as a
potential listof candidates. A web page is said to be a can-
didate when ithas not yet been crawled, but some other web
page which has been accessed by the same user has already
been crawled. The access behavior of this user is incorpo-
rated into the statisticalmodel used to decide whether that
candidate islikelyto satisfythe predicate. This information
may be used by the crawler to decide the order in which it
visitsweb pages.
Thus, at each point the crawler maintains candidate nodes
which itislikelyto crawl and keeps calculatingthe priorities
of the nodes using the information about the user access
patterns of differentweb pages. This statisticalinformation
which relatesthe user behavior to the predicate may be used
to learn the nature of the relationship between web pages
and users.


2.1
Modeling User Experiences
In this section, we will discuss the statistical model which
is used to keep track of the crawling behavior.
Since the
crawler system uses the gateway logs for resource discovery,
itisan interestingquestion as to how the user behavior may
be converted into prioritiesfor visitingweb pages. It is clear
that we need to build a statisticalmodel which connects the
user behavior to the predicate satisfactionprobability of the
candidate web pages.
We assume that the set of features used in the learning
process are stored in the set /C. This set /C maintains the
set of probabilitieswhich indicate the user behavior during
the crawling process. We note that several kinds of informa-
tion about the user behavior may be relevant in determining
whether a web page is relevant to the crawl:
 The access frequency behavior of the users for
different web pages: Users that have accessed web pages
belonging to a given predicate are more likelyto access other
web pages belonging to the predicate.
 The access frequency behavior of the users with
the help of signature features:
A signature feature is
described as any characteristic of a web page such as content,
vocabulary, or any other characteristic of a web page, In
many cases, the access behavior of users in terms of signature
topics yields information which cannot be revealed by their
access behavior from individual web pages. This is because
users may often access web pages belonging to combinations
of topics rather than individual combinations of web pages.
 The temporal
patterns
of behavior
of the dif-
ferent users across different web pages: This means
that users that have just accessed web pages belonging to
the predicate are more likely to access the same in the im-
mediate future. Thus, by taking the order of accesses into




424

account, considerable amount of useful information can be
mined.

2.2
The Frequency Bias Factor
In this section, we discuss the probabilistic model for uti-
lizing the access frequencies of users in computing priorities.
In order to calculate the priorities, we compute the likeli-
hood that the frequency distribution of user accesses makes
it more likely for a candidate web page to satisfy the predi-
cate. In order to understand this point a little better, let us
consider the following case. Suppose that we are searching
for web pages on online malls. Let us assume that only 0.1%
of the pages on the web correspond to this particular pred-
icate. However, it may happen that the percentage of web
pages belonging to online malls accessed by a user is over
10%. In such a case, it is clear that the user is favorably
disposed to accessing web pages on this topic.
If a given
candidate web page has been accessed by many such users
that are favorably disposed to the topic of online malls, then
it may be useful to crawl the corresponding web page. We
would like to quantify the level of favorable disposition of
the candidate page by a value that we will refer to as the
interest ratio.
In order to develop the machinery necessary for the model,
we will introduce some notations and terminology. Let N be
total number of web pages crawled so far. Let U be the event
that a crawled web page satisfies the user defined predicate.
For a candidate page which is about to be crawled, the value
of P(U) is the probability that the web page will indeed
satisfy the user-defined predicate.
The value of P(U) can
be estimated by the fraction of web pages already crawled
which satisfy the user defined predicate.
We will estimate the probability that a web page belongs
to a given predicate U, given the fact that the web page
has been crawled by user i. We shall denote the event that
the person i has accessed the web page by Ra. Therefore,
the predicate satisfaction probability is given by P(UIRi) =
P(U N Ri)/P(Ri). We note that when the person i is topi-
cally inclined towards accessing web pages that belong to the
predicate, then the value of P(UIRa) is greater than P(U).
Correspondingly, we define the interest ratio of predicate
satisfaction as follows:

IB(UIR,) = P(U[Ri)/P(U)
(1)

We note that an interest ratio larger than one indicates that
the person i is significantly more interested in the predicate
than the average interest level of users in the predicate. The
higher the interest ratio, the greater the topical affinity of
the user i to the predicate. Similarly, an interest ratio less
than one indicates a negative propensity of the user for the
predicate. Now, let us consider a web page which has been
accessed by the users il ... ik. Then, a simple definition of
the cumulative interest ratio I(UIRi1,... Ri~) is the prod-
uct of the individual interest ratios for each of the users.
Therefore, we have:

IB (UIRi, ....Rik) = Ir]=zI (UlRi# )
(2)

The above definitiontreats allusers in a uniform way in the
computation of the interestratio. However, not all interest
ratios are equally valuable in determining the value of a
user to the crawling process. This is because we need a
way to filterout those users whose access behavior varies
from average behavior only because of random variations.
In order to measure the significance of an interest ratio, we
use the following computation:

IP(UI/~J) - P(U)I
(3)
T(U, R.i~) = x/p(u) "(1 - P(U))/N

We note that the denominator of the above expression is the
standard deviation of the average of N independent identi-
cally distributed bernoulli random variables, each with suc-
cess probability P(U). The numerator is the difference be-
tween the conditional probability of satisfaction and the un-
conditional probability. The higher this value, the greater
the likelihood that the event Rij is indeed relevant to the
predicate. We note that this value of T(U, Ri~) is the sig-
nificance factor which indicates the number of standard de-
viations by which the predicate satisfaction of U is larger
than the average if the user ij has browsed that web page.
In the computation of the interest ratio of a candidate page,
we use only those users ij for which T(U, R~) > t for some
threshold s t.

2.3 Use ofSignature Characteristics and Brows-
ing Content
We note that the nature of proxy traces is inherently
sparse.
As a result, in many cases, a single user may not
access too many documents in a single trace. Therefore, a
considerable amount of information in the trace can be bro-
ken up into signatures which are particular characteristics of
different web pages. Such signatures may be chosen across
the entire vocabulary of words (content), topical categories
based on scans across the world wide web, or other relevant
characteristics of web pages. The use of such characteristics
is of tremendous value if the signatures are highly correlated
with the predicate. For example, if the document vocabu-
lary is used as the relevant signature, then even though there
many be billions of documents across the world wide web,
the number 4 of relevant words is only of the order of a hun-
dred thousand or so. Therefore, it is easier to find sufficient
overlap of signatures across users in the crawling process.
This overlap helps in reducing the feature space sufficiently,
so that it is possible to determine interesting patterns of
user behavior which cannot be discerned only by using the
patterns in terms of the individual web pages.
In order to formalize the above concept, we will assume
that Lij is the event that the signature j has been accessed
by a given user i.
Thus, for example, when the event j
corresponds to the word j being accessed, it means that the
document corresponding to word j is accessed at least once
by the user i. We define V~ as the event that a document
belonging to the predicate has been accessed at least once by
the user i. We note that the ratio P(I/~ILij)/P(P~) provides
the interest ratio that the access of feature j is interesting
for the user i. However, we are not just interested in the
behavior of a single feature, but that of all the features.
Therefore, we denote the signature specific interest ratio of
the user i by SFi.

SFi = EAiI Features j[P(VilL~J)/P(I'~)]
(4)

Here E[.] denotes the expected value over all the different

ZFor the purpose of this paper, we will use a threshold of t =
2 standard deviations in order to make this determination.
4This assumes that the documents are in English and stop-
words/rare words have been removed.




425

features. As in the previous case, let us assume that a given
candidate page has been browsed by the users it ... ik. The
corresponding events are denoted by /ht...R~.
We de-
note the event that the web page satisfies the predicate by
U. Then, the cumulative interest ratio of predicate satis-
faction, given that any of the signature characteristics in-
side it have been browsed by users il...i~, is denoted by
I$f(U[R4t... R4k) and is defined by the following expres-
sion:

ISF (uI~,
. .. R~,) = 7r~=lSFij
(5)

Not all users may show a high propensity for or against a
particular predicate. Consequently, we would like to filter
out the noise from the above expression. Let ns be the total
number of users for which signature specific interest ratios
have been computed. We define the mean par and standard
deviation asy of the feature-specific interest propensities:

ns



i=1




o sF =
(SF~
-
~s)2/n,
(7)


Therefore, we define the significanceof each user i as follows:

SFF(i) =
I(SF,
-
~sr)l/osr
(8)

Once the significance of each user i has been determined,
we can now use only those users whose significance is above
a pre-deflned threshold t for the purpose of crawling. This
reduces the noise effects in the computation of the inter-
est ratio and ensures that only users that show an access
behavior which is significantly related to the predicate are
used.

2.3.1
An example of signature characteristics
As discussed above, a wide variety of signature character-
istics can be used in order to facilitate the crawling process.
One example of such a set of characteristics is the use of the
topical categories available in the Yahoo! taxonomy. The
characteristics in a web page are defined as the dominant
classes in the taxonomy which are related to it. In order to
achieve this goal, we implemented a classifier system similar
to that described in [2]. This classifier system was capable
of predicting the classes most related to a given web page.
We found the km,,~ = 5 most closely related classes to the
page using the nearest neighbor classifier of [2].

2.4
Use of Temporal Locality in Browsing
The web pages accessed by a given user often show con-
siderable temporal locality. This is because the browing
behavior of a user in a given session is not just random but
is highly correlated in terms of the topical subject matter.
Often users that browse web pages belonging to a particular
topic are likely to browse similar topics in the near future.
This information can be leveraged in order to improve the
quality of the crawl.
In order to model this behavior, we will define the concept
of temporal localityregion of a predicate U by Tll(U). To
do so, we will first define the temporal locality of each web
page access A. The temporal locality of a web page access
A is denoted by TLR(A) and is the n pages accessed either
strictly before or strictly after A by the same user, but not
including A. Now let us say that A1...Am be the set of
accesses which are known to belong to the predicate U. Then
the temporal locality of the predicate U which is denoted by
TI:(U) is defined as follows:

T(U) = Uik=iTLR(A,)
(9)

Let fl be the fraction of web pages belonging to T~(U)
which also satisfy the predicate.
Furthermore, let f2 be
the fraction of web pages outside T(U) which satisfy the
predicate. Then, the overall interest ratio for a web page
belonging to T(U), is given by:

ITL(u) = flIP(U)
(10)

Similarly, the Interest Ratio for a web page which does not
belong to the temporal locality of U is given by:

ITL(u) = jf2/P(V)
(11)

We note that in most cases, the value of .fl is larger than
P(U), whereas the value of .f2 is smaller than P(U). Cor-
respondingly, the interest ratios are larger and smaller than
one respectively. For a given web page, we check whether or
not it belongs to the temporal locality of a web page which
satisfies the predicate. If it does, then the corresponding
interest ratio is incorporated in the computation of the im-
portance of that predicate.

2.5
Combining the different factors
The different factors discussed above can be utilized in
order to create a composite interest ratio which measures
the value of the different factors in the learning process. We
define the composite interest ratio as the product of the in-
terest ratios contributed by the different factors. Therefore,
the combined interest ratio IC(u) for a web page which has
been accessed by users il ... ik is given by:

f
(u) = fL
(u) . fF
(ul]~l . . . P.~ ) " f(Vl~l
... ~)
(12)

This composite interest ratio reflects the overall predicate
satisfaction probability of a web page based on its charac-
teristics.


3.
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The overall sketch of the collaborative crawling algorithm
is discussed in Figure I. The method maintains a candidate
listwhich is denoted by Cand which keeps track of the web
addresses that are to be crawled. In each iteration, the high-
est priority page FF of the candidate list Cand is crawled,
while the learning information and priorities are updated
based on the user access behavior of F. These updated pri-
orities are used in order to expand the listof potential can-
didates. The candidate page F is deleted from Cand after it
has been crawled. The process of calculating the prioritiesis
denoted by CalculatePriorities,whereas that of expanding
the candidate listis denoted by ExpandList. This iterative
process continues until the list Cand becomes empty.
In
addition~ it is assumed that at least rnin-candweb pages
be crawled before the process terminates. If min.cand web
pages have not yet been crawled and Cand is empty, then
the algorithm randomly samples the trace for web pages
which are further added to the candidate list.This ensures




426

Subroutine CalculatePriorities(WebPage: F, Trace: T,
Learning Statistics: K);
begin
Find all the users 'P(F) than have accessed F;
Compute the priorities of all web pages .Af accessed by
P(F) using the computation discussed in section 2;
return(A/');
end

Subroutine ExpandList(CandidateList:
Cand,
NewCandidates: JV)i
{ Add those candidates in .iV to Cand which
have priority above a user-defined threshold; }

Algorithm CollabCrawler(Trace: T, StartingSeeds: S);
begin
Cand = S;
Set priority of each element in Cand to 1;
while Cand is not empty do
begin
Sort Cand in order of decreasing priorities;
Pick the first page F from Cand;
Issue a get request for UI:tL F;
if F satisfies the predicate then save F;

date learning statistics K:;
= CalculatePriorities(F, T, ~);
EzpandList(Cand, Af);
Delete F from Cand;
if Cand is empty and at least min-cand
candidates have not yet been crawled, then add
a randomly sampled URL from 7" to Cand;
end;
end


Figure 1: The Collaborative Crawler Algorithm



that at least rain-canalpages have been crawled before the
process terminates.
In the actual implementation, two hash tables were main-
talned, one of which contained information for the URLs
(URL hashtable), whereas the other (User hashtable) con-
tained information about the users accessing the URLs. For
each user a list of their accesses together with time stamps
were maintained in the user hashtable, whereas the list of
the users accessing a UI:tL together with timestamps were
maintained in the URL hashtable. In addition, a number
of statistical values on the access behavior of the user were
maintained in the hash table. These values were required
in the determination of the predicate access behavior of the
user. These values are denoted by the self-learning informa-
tion K: which is collected by the crawler. The self learning
information K: contains the following values:
(1) Total number N of URLs crawled.
(2) Total number Nu of crawled pages satisfying predicate.
(3) Number qi of crawled pages accessed by user i.
(4) Number q~ of web pages (satisfying the predicate) ac-
cessed by user i.
(5) Number of documents rlj accessed by user i containing
the signature j.
(6) Number of documents r .~. (satisfying the"predicate) ac-
s3
cessed by user i containing the signature j.
(7) Number of documents sl belonging to the temporal lo-
cality of U.
(8) Number of documents s[ belonging to the temporal lo-
caiity of U which satisfy the predicate.
(9) Number of documents s2 which do not belong to the
temporal locality of U.
(10) Number of documents s~ not belonging to the temporal
locality of U which satisfy the predicate.

The quantities (1), (2), (7), (8), (9) and (10) are globally
maintained in individual variables, whereas the quantities
(3), (4), (5), and (6) are maintained for each user in the
hash table. This information are used to estimate the key
statistical parameters and probabilities as follows:
(1) P(U) = N~/N
(2) P(UIP~)= q~/q,
(3) SFi = ~hll Features j (r~/rlj)/(Number of Features)
(4) IR u = s[/sl
(5) IR V= s~/s2
We note that the above set of estimates suffice to com-
pute all the interest ratios discussed in the previous section.
However, it is time-consuming to calculate all the interest-
ratios after each web page is crawled. In order to achieve
better efficiency, the process of updating is executed in a
lazy fashion by CalculatePriorities.
The preference values
are updated only for those users which have accessed the
web page that was last crawled. Then, the interest ratios
for the candidate web pages accessed by these users are up-
dated. Even though this results in the interest ratios of a few
web pages being stale, the web pages which are updated are
the ones which have the maximum change in their priority
values because of the last web page being crawled. In addi-
tion, a periodic process of updating the priorities is applied
every few iterations in order to update these values. The
procedure CalculatePriorities returns a list Af of candidate
URLs whose interest ratios were updated. All those interest
ratios which are larger than 1 are added to the candidate
list. This is achieved by the procedure ExpandList. After
expansion of the list, the candidate page F is removed from
Cand. This procedure is repeated until at least rnin-cand
web pages have been crawled and Cand becomes empty. We
note that one of the inputs to the algorithm is the starting
seed set S. If topic specific resources in the trace are known,
then these can be used as the starting seeds; alternatively
the use of S = {} results in the random sampling of min-
cand pages from the trace as the default starting point.

3.1 Using linkage information
We note that even though this paper is tailored towards
the problem of using user relevance in the crawling process,
it can be combined with a linkage based system in order to
find predicate-specific pages which are less popular. In or-
der to achieve this, the system can find all the web pages
which are linked to by a predicate-satisfying web page and
added to the candidate list. As a result, the list Cand be-
comes a combination of candidates for which we may have
either web log access information or linkage information. In
addition, we need to make changes to the process of calcu-
lation of priorities. In [3], we discussed the computation of
interest ratios which are analogous to those discussed in this
paper using purely linkage based information. Let IL(U) be
the interest ratios computed for a candidate page using the
c
method in [3]. Let I (U) be the corresponding user-based
interest ratio. As discussed earlier, not all web pages have
both linkage based and user-based information associated
with them. Therefore, when such information is not avail-
able, the corresponding value for In(U) or Iv(U) is set to
one. Since the URL for a candidate page is discovered either




427

o.4e


o.~


0.~

oJ



'ii
~
-
0
"
-
0




I-.o-
LiftCurve(Colla,bctalh,i Crmder)
I
-@.~ Cu~ (InlMIk~llf,dCrltwler)

i
/
i
i
I
I
I000
2OO0
3OOO
4OOO
~00
eO00
Numblr~ PlgellCatawled


Figure 2: Performance of Collaborative and Intelli-
gent Crawler (Predicate is category "SPORTS")

O.4




0.~




~ a.2
l
0.1g



0.1



o.o~
"%




-O- tJRCu~ (calllxn~ ~




Figure 3: Performance of Collaborative and Intelli-
gent Crawler (Predicate is category t'Al:tTS ")


from the content of a web page or from the web log, at least
one of these interest ratios can be calculated effectively. The
overall interest ratio is defined by IV(U) 텶L(U). We will
see that the combination of the linkage and user-based sys-
tems is very powerful in practice in improving the quality of
the crawl. This is because the user behavior quickly iden-
tities the most popularly visited resources which often link
to a large number of closely related pages. These pages are
added to the candidate list. The addition of such candidates
facilitates the discovery of some of those rarely accessed web
pages which may not be found in the traces. These in turn
help in the discovery of more topically inclined users and
vice-versa. In other words, some resources can be more eas-
ily crawled from the user information, whereas others require
linkage information. These interest ratios thus act in a com-
plimentary way in finding promising candidates during the
resource discovery process. As a result, the system works
better than one which is developed using either purely user
or purely linkage information.


4.
EMPIRICAL RESULTS
The system was implementedon an AIX 4.1.4 system with
100 MB of main memory and 2GB SCSI drive. The results
were tested using the Squid proxy traces available from [6].
The performance of the crawler is characterized by using
the harvest rate P(U), which is the percentage of web pages
crawled that satisfy the predicate. In order to illustrate our
results, we will present the lift curve which illustrates the
gradual improvement of the harvest rate with the number of
URLs crawled. Initially, the crawling system is slow to find
relevant web pages, but as the crawl progresses, it gradually
learns the propensities of the users in terms of their predicate
satisfaction probability. Correspondingly, the percentage of
the candidates crawled belonging to the predicate increases
as well.
In Figures 2 and 3, we have illustrated an examples of lift
curves which show the crawling performance of the system
over time. In these curves, we have used two different pred-
icates corresponding to the categories of "SPORTS" and
"ARTS" respectively. The initial behavior of the crawler
system is random, but as it encounters web pages belong-
ing to the predicate, the performance quickly improves. In
the same chart, we have also illustrated the performance
of the intelligent crawler algorithm from [3]. The intelligent
crawler algorithm was run using five different starting points
and the bestof these lift curves (as indicated by the value of
P(U) at the end of the crawl) was used. It is interesting to
see that even a single execution of the collaborative crawler
was significantly more effective than even the best of five
executions of the intelligent crawler. This tends to indicate
that the information available in web page links may not be
very robust in always providing considerably effective infor-
mation for the crawling process. In [1], the results axe also
reported for the incorporation of linkage based information
in the collaborative crawler.


5.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY
In this paper, we discussed a method for leveraging user
experiences for effective topical resource discovery. This is
the first topical resource discovery system which deviates
from the pra~:tice of using hyperlink citation behavior as
the primary source of crawling behavior. The utilization of
user experiences is critical in designing a system which is
sensitive to the behavior of users in finding resources which
are both topically accurate and popularly browsed.


6.
REFERENCES
[1] C. C. Aggaxwal. Collaborative Crawling: Mining User
Experiences for Topical Resource Discovery. IBM
Research Report, 2002.
[2] C. C. Aggarwal, S. C. Gates, P. S. Yu. On the merits
of using supervised clustering for building
categorization systems. KDD Conference, 1999.
[3] C. C. Aggarwal, F. AI-Garawi, P. Yu. Intelligent
Crawling on the World Wide Web with Arbitrary
Predicates. WWW Conference, 2001.
[4] S. Chakrabarti, M. van den Berg, B. Dora. Focussed
Crawling: A New Approach to Topic Specific
Resource Discovery. WWW Conference, 1999.
[5] A. Rousskov, V. Solviev. On Performance of Caching
Proxies. http://www.cs.ndsu.nodak.edu/rousskov/
/research/cache/squid/profiling/papers/
[6] ftp://ircache.ulaur.net/Traces/




428

