Text Mining:
Finding
Nuggets
in Mountains
of Textual
Data
Jochen Dijrre, Peter Gerstl, Roland Seiffert
SWSD, IBM Germany
P.O. Box 1380, D-71003 Btjblingen
{doerre,gerstl,seiffert}@de.ibm.com


ABSTRACT

Text mining appliesthe sameanalytical functions of datamining
to the domainof textual information, relying on sophisticatedtext
analysis techniques that distill
information from free-text
documents. IBM's Intelligent Miner for Text provides the
necessary tools to unlock the business information that is
"trapped" in email, insurance claims, news feeds, or other
document repositories. It has been successfully applied in
analyzing patentportfolios, customercomplaint letters,and even
competitors' Web pages. After defining our notion of "text
mining", we focus on the differences between text and data
mining anddescribein somemore detail the unique technologies
that arekey to successfultext mining.

Keywords
Text mining, feature extraction, text categorization, clustering,
customerrelationship management

1. MINING
TEXT
"There is gold hidden in your companiesdata" - and datamining
promisesto help you finding it. And in fact, many successful
applicationsof datamining prove that this is true indeed.But data
mining addressesonly a very limited part of a company'stotal
data assets:the structured information available in databases.
Probably more than 90% of a companiesdata are never being
looked at: letters from customers, email correspondence,
recordings of phone calls with customers,contracts, technical
documentation, patents, ... With ever dropping prices of mass
storage,companiescollect more and more of such data online.
But what canwe get from all this data?More often than not, the
only way the data is made usable - outside of very specific
applications for subsetsof that data - is by making it accessible
and searchablein a companiesintranet. But today there is more
you can do: text mining helps to dig out the hidden gold from
textual information. Text mining leaps from old-fashioned
information retrieval to information andknowledgediscovery.


Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists.
rcquircs prior specific permission and/or a fee.
KDD-99 SanDiego CA USA
Copyright ACM 1999 I-581 13-143-7/99/08...$5.00
The first challenge in text mining is that information in
unstructuredtextual form is not readily accessibleto be usedby
computers.It has been written for human readersand requires
natural language (NL) interpretation. The information really is
buried inside the text. Although a full-blown interpretation of
even just factual knowledge stated in unrestricted natural
languageis still out of reach with current technology, there are
tools using pattern recognition techniques and heuristics that are
capableof extracting valuable bits of information from arbitrary
free-text. Extractedinformation rangesherefrom identifying what
companiesor datesarementionedin a documentto summariesof
adocument.
But there is moreto text mining than just extracting information
piecesfrom single documents.Wherethe mining taskin the sense
of data mining comes in is when one has to deal with huge
collections of documents.Tools performing that task generally
support classification - either in a supervised or in an
unsupervisedfashion - on the documentsseenasobjectsthat are
characterizedby featuresextractedfrom their contents.
We use the "mining" metaphor for both knowledge discovery
processesdescribedabove:the extraction of codified information
(features) from single documentsas well as the analysis of the
feature distribution over whole collections to detect interesting
phenomena,patterns, or trends. Any non-trivial application of
"text mining" necessarilyinvolves both of thosemining phases.

2. HOW TEXT MINING
DIFFERS FROM
DATA MINING
Datamining generally involves the steps.
1.
Identification of acollection
2.
Preparationandfeatureselection
3.
Distribution analysis.
As describedin the lastsection,text mining essentiallyaddsto the
preparatory phasethe very complex feature extraction function.
Moreover, the cardinality of the feature setthat can be extracted
from a documentcollection usually is very high, easily running
into several thousands. There are two consequencesof this
affecting the overall text mining process.
1. The feature selection task is quite different, since it is no
longer feasible to have a human examine each feature to
decide whether to use it or not. Different approachesto
accomplishthis taskrangefrom using simple functions, e.g.,
to filter out features that can be considered as noise, to
complex analytical processes possibly involving human
intervention.




398

2.
The distribution analysis stepmust be able to handle highly
dimensional, but sparsely populated feature vectors. This
often requires special versions and implementations of the
analytical algorithmsusedin datamining.

2.1 IBM Intelligent
Miner for Text
In 1998,IBM for the first time introduced a product in the areaof
text mining: the Intelligent Miner for Text*. It is a software
developmenttoolkit - not aready-to-run application - for building
text mining applications.It addressessystemintegrators,solution
providers, and application developers.The toolkit contains the
necessarycomponentsfor "real text mining": feature extraction,
clustering, categorization, and more. But there are also more
traditional components,e.g., the IBM Text SearchEngine, the
IBM WebCrawler, anddrop-in Intranet searchsolutions. We will
not describethe latter part of the product here,butjust mention it.
Thesecomponentsareessentialto build applications that usethe
information generatedin a mining process,e.g., in an Intranet
portal for the company.

3. MINING
WITHIN
A DOCUMENT:
FEATURE
EXTRACTION
The task of feature extraction is to recognize and classify
significant vocabulary items in unrestricted natural language
texts. Examplesof vocabulary found are shown in Figure 1. The
processis fully automatic - the vocabulary is not predefined.
Nevertheless,asthe figure shows,the namesandother multiword
terms that are found are of high quality and in fact correspond
closely to the characteristicvocabulary usedin the domain of the
documentsbeing analyzed. In fact, what is found is to a large
degree the vocabulary in which concepts occurring in the
collection areexpressed.

Certificateof deposit
Chronar
CMOS
Commercial
bank
Commercial
paper
Commercial
Union Assurance
Commodity
Futures Trading Commission
Consul Restaurant
Convertible
bond
Credit facility
Credit line
Credit Lyonnais
Credit Suisse
Credit Suisse First Boston
Dana
debt security
debtor country
Detroit Edison
Digital Equipment
dollars of debt
end-March
Enserch
equity warrant
Eurodollar




Figure 1 Some of the vocabulary
found by feature extraction
in a collection of financial news stories. The canonical forms
are shown


In general, our implementation of feature extraction relies on
linguistically motivated heuristics (cf. [2]) and pattern matching
together with a limited amountsof lexical information, such as
part-of-speech information. We neither use huge amounts of
lexicalized information, nor do we perform in-depth syntactic and
semanticanalysesof texts. This decision allows usto achievetwo
majorgoals:
1. Very fastprocessingto beableto dealwith massdata
2.
Domain-independencefor generalapplicability

The extracted information will beautomatically classified into the
following categories:
.
Namesof persons,organizationsandplaces
like Mrs. M. Albright, National Organization of Women
BusinessOwners,or Dheli, India
.
Multiword terms
like joint venture,online document,or centralprocessing
unit
.
Abbreviations
like EEPROM for Electrical erasableprogrammableread-
only memory
.
Relations
like JackSmith-age-42,JohnMiller-own-Knowledge Corp.,
JanetPema-GeneralManager-DatabaseManagement
.
Otheruseful stuff numerical or textual formsof numbers,
percentages,dates,currencyamounts,etc.
We always assigna so-calledcanonical form to eachfeature we
find. Simple, but very useful examplesinclude normalized forms
of dates,numbersetc.This allows applicationsto usethat kind of
information very easily, eventhough, e.g., a numberwas written
in words in a text. A canonical form also abstractsfrom different
morphological variants of a single term, e.g., singular and plural
forms of the sameexpressionaremappedto the samecanonical
form.
More complex processingis done in the caseof names.All the
namesthat refer to the sameentity, for examplePresidentClinton,
Mr. Clinton and Bill Clinton, are recognized as referring to the
sameperson. Each such group of variant namesis assigneda
canonical name,(e.g., "Bill Clinton") to distinguish it from other
groups referring to other entities ("Clinton, New Jersey"). The
canonical name is the most explicit, least ambiguous name
constructed from the different variants found in the document.
Associating a particular occurrenceof a variant with a canonical
name reducesthe ambiguity of variants. For example, in one
document, "IRA" is associatedwith the Irish Republican Army,
while in another it may be associated with an Individual
RetirementAccount.
Optionally, the tool computesstatisticaldataon the distribution of
features in documents and document collections. This allows,
e.g.,the clustering tool to judge the significance of a featurein a
documentwith respectto the statistical backgroundpropertiesof
the whole documentcollection.

4. MINING
IN COLLECTIONS
OF
DOCUMENTS:
CLUSTERING
AND
CATEGORIZATION
With the mappingof documentsto featurevectorsthat describe
themin place,we canperformdocumentclassification in either of
two ways.
Clustering is afully automaticprocess,which partitions agiven
collection into groupsof documentssimilar in contents,i.e., in
1For moreinformation alsoon other components,pleaserefer to
httn:Nwww.software.ibm.comldata/iminer/fortext




399

In clustering, document collections are processed
I
In categorization, document collections are
and grouped into clusters that are dynamically
processed
and grouped
into categories
that are
gen&&ed
by the algorithm

Document Collection




aaa
666
Cluster1
Cluster2
Cluster3
Cluster4
predetermined
based on a user-provided
taxonomy.
Cdl samples
ca2 sams,+:;:;,,
slrmla
Document Collection




fxJ-03
6666
1
Categorization
schema
Cat1 Cat2 Cat3 Cat4




Figure 2 Clustering versusCategorization

their feature vectors. Intelligent Miner for Text includes two
clustering engines employing algorithms that are useful in
different kinds of applications. The Hierarchical Clustering tool
orders the clusters into a tree reflecting various levels of
similarity. The Binary Relational Clustering tool uses"Relational
Analysis" (cf. [l]) to produce a flat clustering together with
relationships of different strengthbetweenthe clusters reflecting
inter-cluster similarities. Both tools help to identify the topic of a
group by listing terms or words that are common in the
documentsin the group. Thus, clustering is a great meansto get
anoverview of the contentsof acollection.
The secondkind of classification is called (text) categorization.
The Topic Categorization tool assignsdocumentsto preexisting
categories,sometimescalled "topics" or "themes". The categories
are chosen to match the intended use of the collection. In the
Intelligent Miner for Text thosecategoriesare simply defined by
providing a set of sampledocumentsfor each category. All the
analysis of the categories, feature extraction and choice of
features, i.e., key words and phrases, to characterize each
category,is doneautomatically. This "training" phaseproducesa
special index, called the categorization schema, which is
subsequently used to
categorize new documents. The
categorizationtool returnsa list of categorynamesandconfidence
levels for each document being categorized.Documents can be
assignedto morethan onecategory.If the confidencelevel is low,
then typically the documentwould be put asideso that a human
categorizercanmakethe final decision.
Testshaveshownthat, provided the setof defined categoriesdoes
match the subject matter of incoming documents, the Topic
Categorization tool agreeswith human categorizersto the same
degreeashumancategorizersagreewith oneanother.

5. TEXT MINING
APPLICATIONS
As is the casewith data mining technology, one of the primary
application areasof text mining is collecting andcondensingfacts
as a basis for decision support. The main advantagesof mining
technology over atraditional `information broker' businessare:
.
The ability to quickly processlarge amountsof textual data
which could not beperformedeffectively by humanreaders.
.
`Objectivity' and customizability of the process- i.e. the
results solely depend on the outcome of the linguistic
processing algorithms and statistical calculations provided
by thetext mining technology
.
Possibility to automate labor-intensive routine tasks and
leavethe moredemandingtasksto humanreaders.

Taking advantageof theseproperties,text mining applications are
typically usedto:
.
Extract
relevant
information
from
a
document
(summarization,featureextraction, ...)
.
Gain
insights
about
trends,
relations
between
people/places/organizations,
etc.
by
automatically
aggregating and comparing information extracted from
documentsof a certain type (e.g. incoming mail, customer
letters,news-wires,...).
.
Classify and organize documentsaccording to their content;
i.e. automatically pre-select groups of documents with a
specific topic andassignthemto the appropriateperson.
.
Organize repositories of document-relatedmeta-information
for searchandretrieval




400

.
Retrieve documents based on various sorts of information
about the document content
This list of activities shows that the main application areas of text
mining
technology
cover the two aspects
(1) knowledge
discovery
(mining
proper) and (2) information
`distillation'
(mining on the basis of some pre-established structure). Due to
the lack of space we will concentrate on a single application that
uses IBM's Intelligent Miner for Text to support both aspects,
discovery and distillation: customer relationship management.

5.1 Customer Relationship
Management
Based on the Intelligent Miner for Text product IBM offers an
application called CR1 (Customer Relationship Intelligence) that
is designed to specifically help companies better understand what
their customers want and what they think about the company
itself.
After selecting the appropriate set of input documents (e.g.
customer complaint
letters, phone call transcriptions,
e-mail
conversation) and converting them to a common standard format,
the CR1 application uses the feature extraction and clustering
tools to derive a database of documents which are grouped
according to the similarity of their content.
Depending on the purpose of the data analysis, the user might
select different parameters for the preprocessing (e.g. concentrate
on names and dates) and for the clustering step (e.g. use a more or
less restrictive similarity measure).
When clustering
customer feedback information,
the result
exposes groups of feedback that share important
linguistic
elements, e.g. descriptions of a difficulty
customers have with a
certain product or support organization. Information of this type
can be used to identify
problematic
areas that need to be
addressed. Sometimes the cluster itself may provide clues about
how the problem could be solved, e.g. do the documents have
something in common which is independent from the problem
description such as the location, background, ... of the customers
that raised the issue?
As a separate step after a set of useful clusters has been identified
and, probably manually enhanced, the categorization tool can be
used to assign new incoming customer feedback to the identified
categories.
The CRI application
incorporates
both, the distillation
and
discovery aspects of text mining.
A typical usage scenario starts
with an unstructured collection of documents (transcripts, mails,
and scanned letters), creating some interpretable
structure by
means of clustering which corresponds to the aspect of discovery.
The refinement and extension of the clustering results by means
of interpreting the results, tuning of the clustering process, and
selecting meaningful clusters emphasizes the aspect of distillation.


6. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have described our notion of "text mining" and
relevant core technology components. IBM's
product for text
mining
applications,
the Intelligent
Miner
for Text, enables
customers to use these new technologies in practical text mining
applications.
We have shown this by describing a customer
relationship management application that is based on IBM's text
mining components. As this application shows, text mining to-
date can be used as an effective business tool that supports the
creation of knowledge by preparing and organizing unstructured
textual data (discovery)
and by supporting the extraction of
relevant information from large amounts of unstructured textual
data through
automatic pre-selection
based on user-defined
criteria
(distillation).
Using
automatic
mining
processes to
organize
and scan huge repositories
of textual
data can
significantly enhance both the efficiency and quality of a routine
task while still leaving the more challenging and critical part of it
to the one who can do it best, the human reader.

7. REFERENCES
[l]
F. Marcotorchino,
"Block
seriation problems: A unified
approach", Applied Stochastic Models and Data Analysis, 3,
73-91 (1987).
[2] N. Wacholder and Y. Ravin, Disambiguation
of Proper
Names in Text, Proc. of the 5th Conference on Applied
Natural Language Processing, April 1997, Washington, D.C.




401

