Interactive Exploration of Very Large Relational Datasets
through 3D Dynamic Projections


Li Yang
Department of Computer Science, Western Michigan University
Kalamazoo, Michigan 49008

yang@cs.wmich.edu


ABSTRACT
The grand tour, one of the most popular methods for multi-
dimensional data exploration, is based on orthogonally pro-
jecting multidimensional data to a sequence of lower dimen-
sional subspaces and then moving continuously from one
to another. By running experiments on screen and in the
CAVE virtual environment, we were able to use the method
for the 3D rendering of very large relational datasets where
projections are made onto 3D subspaces. 3D cluster-guided
tour is proposed where sequences of projections are deter-
mined by centroids of data clusters. It makes inter-cluster-
distance-preserving projections in the perspectives that the
data clusters are displayed as separate as possible. The ex-
ploration of very large datasets is supported by using vol-
ume rendering through texture splatting. Volume rendering
takes as input only the aggregation or part of data needed for
rendering, which can be retrieved efficiently by SQL queries
in an ad hoc manner while we explore or drill down large
datasets. To facilitate interactive picking and brushing, a
kd-tree multidimensional indexing mechanism is designed.
Access methods for subspace search and range query are
proposed to greatly reduce the cost of searching and picking
interesting data records. Various add-on features, such as
projecting variable axes and cluster similarity graphs, help
further the understanding of data.


Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications--
Data Mining; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology
and Techniques--Interaction Techniques; I.3.7 [Computer
Graphics]:
Three Dimensional Graphics and Realism--
Animation, Virtual Reality; H.3.3 [Information Storage
and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval--Clus-
tering, Selection Process; G.3 [Mathematics of Comput-
ing]: Probability and Statistics--Multivariate Statistics


General Terms
Design, Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
Visualization techniques have proven to be of high value in
exploratory data analysis and data mining. When we talk
about very large relational tables, we imply that either the
tables are very wide (up to a few hundred dimensions), or
very long (a huge number of records), or both. For small
dataset with a few dimensions and a few records, scatter-
plot is an excellent means for visualization. Patterns could
be efficiently unveiled by simply drawing each data record as
a geometric object in the space determined by two or three
numeric variables of the data, while its size, shape, color
and texture determined by other variables of the data. The
ability to draw scatterplots is a common feature of many vi-
sualization systems. However, conventional scatterplots lose
their effectiveness as either dimensionality or the number of
records becomes large.

The ways to handle large datasets are then twofold: to deal
with high dimensionality and to deal with large number of
records. Many techniques, such as scatterplot matrix, par-
allel coordinates, star glyphs, and dimensional stacking, are
developed to visualize data of more than three dimensions.
While these techniques are useful to explore moderate di-
mensioned datasets, they are not intuitive for interactive
exploration. To retain the nature of data records as multidi-
mensional points, a good way is to project data orthogonally
onto 2D or 3D subspaces which allow us to look at relational
data in a geometry that is within the perceptibility of hu-
man eyes. Since there is an infinite number of possibilities
to project high dimensional data onto lower dimensions, the
grand tour method [1, 5, 6] provides an overview of all pos-
sible projections through sampling all possible planes ran-
domly. By displaying a number of intermediate projections
obtained by interpolation between any two projections, the
entire process creates an illusion of continuous smooth mo-
tion. This helps to find interesting projections which is hard
to find in the original data with only low dimensional plots.

A tour could be further guided by projection pursuit which
examines the distribution of data and aims at helping the
users to find interesting projections. For clustered datasets,
the position of data clusters could be used to help choos-
ing projections. The idea is to choose the centroids of four
clusters and project all data points onto a 3D subspace de-
termined by these four cluster centroids.
The four clus-
ters will then be displayed as separate as possible from each
other. Furthermore, this projection is distance-preserving in
the sense that the distance shown between any two of these
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
KDD 2000, Boston, MA USA
Е ACM 2000 1-58113-233-6/00/08 ...$5.00




236

four cluster centroids is exactly the same as their original
distance. We call this a cluster-guided projection. By us-
ing grand tour linking the cluster-guided projections from
one to another with a geodesic (actually pseudo-geodesic
after interpolation) path, a viewer can quickly have a good
sense of the position of all data clusters by moving smoothly
through all cluster-guided projections. This is what we call
the cluster guided tour.

Datasets could also be very large in terms of the number of
data records. Modern relational databases often contain so
many records that it is impractical to display interactively
all of them as points in a single scatterplot. Even if the dis-
play of so many points were possible, its usefulness would
be diminished by overwhelming appearance and excessive
occlusion. Previous way to deal with this problem is sam-
pling. In this paper we show a better way for the exploration
of very large dataset by visualizing 3D density maps using
volume rendering.

To handle large number of data records, one improvement
to scatterplot is to draw density maps instead of individual
data points. The way to draw 3D density map is volume ren-
dering. The main idea behind volume rendering is that data
points are discretized and grouped into bins. Each bin is a
range of values for each of the variables. Data points belong-
ing to each range are then categorized into each bin. Volume
rendering takes each of these bins, and displays them onto
screen as voxels. There are many methods of implementing
volume rendering. Since the result is expected to represent
an amorphous cloud of colored data points, it is felt that
texture splatting using Gaussian footprints[18] is the most
natural choice.

Volume rendering takes as input only a set of data bins and,
in each bin, the number of data records. The size of this
highly aggregated data is much smaller than that of the
original, making it possible to be transferred from database
in an ad hoc manner. More importantly, data bins and the
number of records in each bin can be retrieved efficiently
from relational database by the SQL GROUP BY query.
To further accelerate the process, the binned and aggregated
data can be pre-calculated and stored as summary tables in
database. Volume rendering, together with database sup-
port, enables fast rendering of very large datasets.

Picking and brushing are problems for the interactive ex-
ploration of very large datasets. Picking and brushing are
special kinds of range queries that each mouse click on screen
selects a "tubular" range in the original n-dimensional space.
Since the data to be selected are points in high dimensional
space, it is felt that kd-tree[3] and its variants such as k-d-b-
tree[12] and KD-DT[15] are favorable multidimensional in-
dexing mechanisms. Access method of subspace search and
range query is proposed to take advantage of the kd-tree
data structure to reduce the cost of searching and picking
interesting data points.

There are other issues for the interactive visualization of re-
lational data. For example, a direct interface to databases
is absolutely necessary so that only data needed for render-
ing are retrieved in an ad hoc manner while we drill down
large datasets.
Another issue is that many variables are
categorical rather than numerical. The values of categorical
variables have no explicit ordering. This makes them diffi-
cult to map to a linear scatterplot axis. Furthermore, real
world datasets have always a lot of missing values[11]. Miss-
ing values need special treatments in data visualization, for
the same reason they are specially treated in databases.

There are many previous work focusing on the visualization
of multivariate datasets. XmdvTool[17] is a tool integrat-
ing scatterplot matrices, parallel coordinates, star glyphs,
and dimensional stacking by linking alternative views using
brushing. The idea of using sequences of lower dimensional
projections to simulate higher dimensional display was pro-
posed in [1]. An example visualization system that imple-
mented 2D projection and grand tour was XGobi[13]. 2D
cluster-guided projections were studied in [8] and were im-
plemented in CViz, which concentrates on 2D projections
determined by any three clusters.
There are also exam-
ples of exploratory data visualization in immersive virtual
reality environments. Virtual Data Visualizer[16] employs
a data organization with data arranged hierarchically in
classes that can be visualized within the virtual environ-
ment. VRGobi[14], which is a virtual reality extension of
XGobi, uses the C2 immersive environment for the dynamic
display of statistical graphics. So far, the only application
we have encountered that implements volume rendering for
visual data mining is the SplatViz[2] tool in the SGI MineSet
software.

This paper presents the n23Tool, a visual exploration tool
which uses 3D grand tour for relational data and 3D clus-
ter guided tour for data clusters. Compared with previous
work such as CViz[8] on 2D cluster projections, n23Tool is
capable of 3D view by taking advantage of modern graphics
hardware. It allows tour transition between cluster views.
Up to four clusters can be displayed in a distance-preserving
way in a 3D view. All these features make it easier to dis-
cover complex patterns and holes in datasets. n23Tool is
particularly capable for very large datasets through volume
rendering. Selection and drill down are instantly supported
through interface with databases. Two versions of the tool
have been implemented: one is an on-screen version; the
other is a virtual reality version using the CAVE[7] immer-
sive virtual environment.
The on-screen version supports
stereo display which provides depth cues for 3D scatterplot.
The virtual reality version is more impressive.
With the
CAVE as a 3D "magic canvas", scatterplots can be drawn
in mid-air in a 3D virtual space. The n23Tool was designed
as a high end tool to cater the needs for the visual explo-
ration of very large datasets. It is now routinely employed
for database exploration, preprocessing and analyzing clus-
tering results.


2. 3D CLUSTER-GUIDED TOUR
Grand tour is an extension of data rotation for multidimen-
sional datasets. It is based on selecting a sequence of pro-
jections and moving continuously from one projection to the
next. By displaying a number of intermediate projections
obtained by interpolation between any two projections, the
entire process creates an illusion of continuous, smooth mo-
tion.
This helps to find interesting projections which are
hard to find with only low-dimensional plots of the origi-
nal data. Furthermore, grand tour allows a viewer to easily




237

A
Geodesic
Path




Current
Projection
Target
Projection




The Origin




Figure 1: Moving 2D projections along a geodesic
path in a 3D space.



keep track of a specific group of data points throughout the
journey of a tour.

For illustration, suppose we are to make a 2D tour of 3D
Euclidean space(Figure 1). The most straight way to move
from one 2D projection to the next is a sequence of inter-
polated projections to move the 2D projection plan, or a
2-frame (a 2-frame is an orthonormal pair of vectors), to
the next along a geodesic path. For 3D grand tour of n-
dimensional (n > 3) datasets, in the same way, it is nec-
essary to have an explicitly computable sequence of inter-
polated 3-frames in n-dimensional Euclidean space.
The
n-dimensional data is then projected, in turn, onto the 3D
subspace spanned by each 3-frame. For the shortest path to
move from one 3D projection to another, the sequence of the
interpolated 3-frames should be along a geodesic path. Mov-
ing along a geodesic path creates a sequence of intermediate
projections moving smoothly from the current to the tar-
get projection. This is a way of assuring that the sequence
of projections is comprehensible, and also moves rapidly to
the target projection. For 3D projections, a geodesic path
is simply a rotation in the (at most) 6-dimensional subspace
containing both the current and the target 3D subspaces.
This implies that some preprojection is useful in the imple-
mentation to speed up computation.

There are various ways of choosing paths of a tour. A sim-
plest way is random tour. The target projection in each step
in a random tour is randomly generated. This creates a way
for dynamic browsing of relational data by moving among
randomly chosen 3D subspaces.
Another straightforward
way is choosing the span of any three arbitrary variables as
a 3D subspace and moving from this span to the next span
of another three variables. The projection in a span is ex-
actly a 3D scatterplot. This is more than 3D scatterplots,
however, because more information could be unveiled by the
motion moving from one projection to another. This is what
we call simple projection. Simple projection gives a way to
continuously check a sequence of scatterplots of data on any
three variables. Figure 2 shows a simple projection of the
Figure 2: Simple projection: a 3D scatterplot.



Adult dataset from the UCI ML Repository[4]. Two cate-
gorical variables, education and occupation, are plotted with
their possible values shown along the axes from the origin.
A continuous variable, age, is displayed with its mean value
set at the origin and its range of values marked by numbers.


More advanced ways of grand tour come from exploratory
statistics where data distribution is involved in choosing
the path of a tour.
For example, one way is to restrict
paths of projections to principal components and canonical
variate subspace[10]. Another way constructs hill-climbing
paths that follow gradients of projection pursuit indices[6,
9]. These techniques are efficient ways to examine statistical
significance of variables. For clustered datasets, however, we
have a way, what we call the cluster-guided tour, to show the
structure of data clusters.

Suppose that we have partitioned an n-dimensional dataset
into k (k > 4) clusters, and let {cj}kj=1 denote the centroids
of these clusters. Any combination of four distinct and non-
colinear cluster centroids ca, cb, cc and cd in {cj} determines
a unique 3D subspace of n-space. Let i1, i2 and i3 constitute
an orthonormal basis of the 3D subspace (this could be ob-
tained by orthonormalizing, for example, cb-ca, cc -ca, and
cd - ca). We can then compute a 3D projection by project-
ing the n-dimensional dataset onto the 3-frame (i1, i2, i3).
This projection preserves the inter-cluster distances, that is,
the Euclidean distances between any two of the four clus-
ter centroids {ca, cb, cc, cd} will remain unchanged after the
projection. This projection is a right perspective to view
these four clusters because the four clusters are visualized
as separate as possible.




238

Figure 3: A 3D cluster-guided projection where the
3D subspace is determined by centroids of 4 clus-
ters 0, 1, 3, 5. The projection-determining cluster
centroids are visualized as big spheres, while other
cluster centroids are visualized as smaller cubes.



Cluster-guided tour is a way to get cluster centroids involved
in choosing projection steps. Given k cluster centroids, there
are at most (k4) combinations of unique 3D cluster projec-
tions. The basic idea behind cluster-guided tour is simple:
Choose a target projection from (k4) possible cluster-guided
projections, move smoothly from the current projection to
the target projection, and continue. We illustrate the 3D
cluster-guided tour on the Boston housing data set[4]. The
dataset was clustered into 6 clusters. There are (64) = 15 pos-
sible 3D cluster-guided projections. One of them is plotted
in Figure 3. The 3D cluster-guided tour reveals significant
information about the position of clusters.



3. VOLUME RENDERING
One of the problems of displaying large multi-dimensional
data sets with 3D scatterplot is the possibility of having
more than one data point with the same values.
These
points would be drawn in the exact same location in a scat-
terplot, preventing the viewer from seeing more than one
data point. Another problem is that the visual presenta-
tion of a large dataset using a scatterplot would result in
millions of data points cluttered together making it nearly
impossible for the average human to understand.
Table 1: Processed Data for volume rendering
Minority
Commute
Crime
иии
Weight
0-25
0-1
0.01-0.02
иии
2
26-50
0-1
0.01-0.02
иии
1
иии
иии
иии
иии
иии
0-25
2-3
0.01-0.02
иии
5
0-25
4-5
0.01-0.02
иии
1
иии
иии
иии
иии
иии



An improvement of scatterplot to display large number of
data points is to draw density map instead of individual
data points. The way to draw 3D density map is volume
rendering.
Volume rendering helps a viewer perceive the
density of data points in each location of a 3D scatterplot.

Conventionally, volume rendering is the direct display of
3D volume data. However, the volume data it has to take
as input here are multidimensional. The multidimensional
voxelized data to be rendered are obtained using binning.
The tradeoff between accuracy and rendering speed is deter-
mined by binning resolution. Relational table is a natural
data structure for representing the voxelized data because of
the sparsity of data points in multidimensional space. Each
voxel is represented as a record in the table. The weight of
each voxel after binning is an aggregation. In most cases,
it is the number of data points in a corresponding bin. In
some other cases, it may be the sum or even the weight
records by the value of some other variable. We use again
the Boston Housing data as an example. The first step is to
bin the variables to a desired resolution. Then an aggrega-
tion is performed to compute counts using binned numeric
variables as keys. This results in the processed data shown
in Table 1. There will be at most one row (bin) for each
combination of variables.

Uniform binning is used to discretize the continuous vari-
ables. Categorical variables use unique values as bins. The
binning is performed directly on database using aggregation
queries. To further speed up the process, a summary table
can be created in database to store the binning results. Since
table is used as the underlying data structure, no storage is
wasted on regions with no data.

We decided to use splatting[18] as a way for volume render-
ing. Splatting projects voxels onto the 2D viewing plane.
The projection of each voxel is approximated by a Gaus-
sian splat, whose opacity and colour depend on those of
the voxel.
The resulting splats are composited on top of
each other in back to front order to produce the final image.
Splatting was proposed to improve the calculation speed at
the price of less accurate rendering. The n23Tool utilizes the
splatting method using 2D texture splats. A high degree of
accuracy is not necessary for our purposes as compared to
the rendering speed.

Opacity is assigned to each voxel as a function of its weight
of the corresponding bin. The function used in the n23Tool
is:

 = 1 - e-хиweight

where  is the opacity of a splat at its center, weight is




239

Figure 4: Volume rendering of a simple projection.



the weight of aggregated data points in the bin, and х is a
scale factor. This exponential opacity function is effective
in modeling light propagation through clouds of tiny light-
emitting spheres. The colour of the splat is determined by
the average value of colors of all points in the corresponding
bin. The splats are drawn in back to front order, at each bin
location to form an image that approximates the appearance
of a scatterplot of the original data (Figure 4). A slider is
used to vary the value of the scale factor х.
This allows
global scaling of the opacity for each splat to make an entire
display image of rendered splats more or less transparent.

An advantage of the n23Tool is that it has direct interface
to backend database system. With database support, the
volume exploration of a large dataset never needs retrieving
the whole dataset. The less aggregated subset of data will
not be retrieved until you select a subset of data and drill
down. This pick-and-drill-down process could continue until
you reach the record level when a set of individual data
points are retrieved. In this way, the n23Tool is capable of
visual exploration of very large datasets.


4. BRUSHING AND PICKING WITH THE
KD-TREE INDEX
Brushing and picking are fundamental requirements for in-
teractive data exploration. During the journey of a tour,
a viewer can easily keep track of the movement of selected
data points. Data points picked up can then be related back
to the data, thus make it possible for further analysis such
as launching another tour of selected data points or another
mining process for drill down. Due to the highly interac-
tive nature of brushing and picking, the brute force way of
searching all data records for matching points will not work
for large datasets. An index and search strategy is needed.
Query Region




(a)
Query Region




(b)

Figure 5: kd-tree splitting patterns: (a) Cyclic split-
ting, and (b) Domain priority splitting.



There exist a number of multidimensional indexing tech-
niques. Since we take data as a set of static points in n-
dimensional Euclidean space, it seems that kd-tree is a good
choice. Binary kd-trees organize n-dimensional data for ef-
ficient search of nearest neighbors. A kd-tree partitions a
dataset recursively by the median of the dimension with the
greatest range. The "longest" dimension is always split in
an attempt to keep each node's geometric region as compact
as possible. The user specifies a threshold, that is, the min-
imum number of data records allowed in a leaf node. The
algorithm uses the threshold to decide when to stop parti-
tioning a node. Each leaf lists the data records that satisfy
the conditions implied by the path to the leaf.

kd-tree is a main-memory data structure generalizing the
binary search tree to multidimensional data. To adapt kd-
trees to secondary storage, one way is to choose domains
cyclically to split interior nodes(Figure 5(a)) and pack mul-
tiple interior nodes into a single page. We are better off in-
cluding in one page a node and all its descendants for some
number levels. Another way is to have multiway branches
at each interior node where interior nodes look more like
B-tree nodes which have multiple partitions along a dimen-
sion(Figure 5(b)).

Typical inputs to kd-tree search are a "query" instance (a
n-dimensional position) and a threshold, which defines the
size of neighbor. For brushing and picking on screen, how-
ever, each mouse click specifies a n-dimensional "tube" with
2 dimensions bounded by the size of the brush and the rest
n - 2 dimensions open for free1. Furthermore, the orienta-
tion of the brushing "tube" will always change depending
on the move of projections in a tour.
In such a case, it
would be desirable to have kd-tree regions as "n-cubical"
as possible. The cyclic splitting pattern(Figure 5(a)) would
be better than the domain priority splitting(Figure 5(b)).
This is because that, in most cases, the former would have
smaller regions to search for brushing and picking.

It is convenient to think of a brushing "tube" as an n-
dimensional region that satisfies a neighborhood inequation.
Brushing is to select all data points within this region. The
search begins from the root of kd-tree. If that node is not a

1
In the case of 3D brushing and picking in a virtual reality
environment, 3 dimensions are bounded by a 3D brush, and
the rest n - 3 dimensions are open for free.




240

leaf, the query region is compared to the node's split point
and the appropriate children that intersect with the query
region are identified. Recursive call to each child is then
made. If the node is a leaf, the algorithm checks whether
each data point at the leaf is within the query region. The
algorithm finally returns a list of selected data points.


5. CATEGORICAL AXES AND MISSING
VALUES
It is quite common for many variables to be categorical
rather than numerical. A categorical variable can be mapped
onto a linear scatterplot axis in the same way as a numeric
variable, provided that some order of distinct values of that
variable is given along the categorical axis. Here we have
several options: First, the distinct values of a categorical
variable may be explicitly listed.
The order of the cate-
gorical values being listed will be the order these values be
arranged on the axis. Second, categorical values could be
grouped together, reflecting the natural taxonomy of values.
Third, values of a categorical variable can also be sorted
alphabetically, or numerically by aggregate value of some
other variable.

The scatterplot in Figure 2 shows two categorical variables,
occupation and education. Values of occupation are sorted
by the variable hours-per-week along the left axis. The oc-
cupations, farming-fishing and executive-managerial, listed
at the end of the axis have the longest working hours, and
private-house-services has the shortest. Values of education
are given explicitly with some of the values, such as Masters
and Doctorate, are grouped together.

It is common for relational data to contain missing values.
These missing values are treated quite differently from one
data mining algorithm to another. The remedies for deal-
ing with missing values are based on the randomness of the
missing data process and the method used to estimate the
missing values[11]. Simply removing all nulls isn't a fully
satisfactory solution since you significantly bias the data.
Also, assuming nulls to a certain value, for example, the
mean of the variable, is generally not acceptable as this in-
troduces more confusion and creates outliers.
There are
algorithms[11] that try to estimate a maximum likelihood
value for each null.
For the purpose of visualization, we
think it is better to do nothing more on missing values but
to keep what it is. Null axis values for a continuous variable
are placed below the range of the values for that variable.
For a categorical variable, missing values are placed at the
origin of the corresponding axis. They are not confused with
other values as all categorical values are arranged on the
positive part of the categorical axis. In addition, null color
values are shown as gray, and null label and message values
are shown with a question mark. In Figure 2, the value of
occupation is sometimes missing. These points appear on
the plane through the origin where the value of occupation
is zero, offset from the points that have the first occupation
value.


6. RENDERING IN THE CAVE
CAVE is a projection-based virtual environment that uses
3D computer graphics and position tracking to immerse
viewers inside a 3D space. The CAVE allows multiple view-
Figure 6: A snapshot of the n23Tool CAVE Version.
The wireframe box indicates the CAVE's physical
space where data points being plotted in mid-air.
The cube at the bottom is for brushing.


ers to enter the space and share the same virtual experience.
With the CAVE as a 3D "magic canvas", 3D projection of
high dimensional data is rendered as a galaxy in mid-air in
the virtual space (Figure 6). This helps visualize the exact
3D position of data points, show similarity or dissimilar-
ity between clusters, and determine which clusters to merge
or to split further. The variable vectors, which show the
contribution to the projection of each variable, are visual-
ized as lines in white color through the origin and marked
by the names of variables at their far ends. There are two
ways of interactive picking: brushing with a resizable cube
brush (shown in Figure 6); and cluster-picking by selecting
a cluster centroid. The CAVE has plenty of space for 3D
rendering.

The CAVE was initially designed for scientific and engineer-
ing visualization. It has no tool or library for GUI design.
The n23Tool requires a user interface that is fairly com-
plicated for a virtual environment. The interface must be
designed to give the user control over the journey of a tour.
We have taken the approach that a combination of more-or-
less traditional menus and more direct means of icon ma-
nipulation will do the job. Controls in the n23Tool include
a panel (shown in the lower-right corner of the right wall
in Fugure 6) and submenus for various actions and control-
ling animation. Tools include a cube brush for picking data
points, reclustering using the k-means clustering algorithm,
single step forward and backward in a guided tour, and so
on.


7. SOME ADD-ON FEATURES
7.1 Where We Are in a Tour?



241

A dizzy feeling besets many viewers of high-dimensional data
projections and they may ask "How do I know what I am
looking at". In geometric terms, the task is to locate the
position of a projection 3-frame. In XGobi[13], a visual way
of conveying this information is to project the variable unit
vectors in n-space like regular data, and render the result
together with data points.

n23Tool follows the way used in XGobi. Examples of the ap-
plication are shown throughout all screen snapshots in this
paper. A generalized tripod called "n-pod" is an enhanced
rendition of the n variable unit vectors in n-space. Variable
unit vectors in the n-pod can be treated as if they were real
data, rendered as lines, and labeled by variable names in the
far ends so that they are recognized as guide posts rather
than data. Continuous variables are displayed as lines with
their means set at the origin. This is for the easy mark of
both minimum and maximum values at both ends of each
line.
Categorical variables are displayed as rays starting
from the origin. The n23Tool always maps categorical val-
ues onto the positive part of a categorical axis. The n-pod
looks like a star with n unequal rays (or lines across the
origin for continuous variables) in 3D space, each indicating
the contribution of a variable to the current projection.

7.2 Cluster Similarity Graphs
Data projection is a continuous transformation. Two points
which are close with each other will remain close after pro-
jection. However, two points which are close in a projection
need not be close themselves. To somewhat mitigate this
information loss, we use cluster similarity graph as an en-
hancement to data projection.

A cluster similarity graph can be defined as follows.
Let
vertices be a set of cluster centroids, and add an edge be-
tween two vertices if the distance between them is less than
a user-controlled threshold. It is thus intuitively clear that
changing the threshold value will reveal the difference of dis-
tances among cluster centroids. The cluster similarity graph
can be overlaid onto data projections. Figure 7 represents
a cluster similarity graph at a certain threshold. It can be
seen that the Clusters 0, 1, 3 are close to each other, among
which Cluster 1 and Cluster 3 are close to Cluster 4 which
is close to Cluster 2. Cluster 5 is standalone from all others.
The cluster similarity graph adds yet another information
dimension to cluster projections.

Other features of the n23Tool include parallel clustering and
stereo display.
The n23Tool implemented multithread k-
means clustering on shared memory machines. The many it-
erations that the clustering function has to perform is spread
out over many processes (threads). The on-screen version of
the n23Tool includes an option to view the scatterplot and
volume rendering in stereoscopic images.

8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper discussed the n23Tool, a tool using 3D grand
tour and volume rendering to visualize very large relational
datasets. Grand tour creates an illusion of smooth motion
through multidimensional space. Cluster-guided tour pre-
serves distances between the cluster centroids. It allows us
to capture the inter-cluster structure of complex relational
data. Volume rendering using texture splatting enables the
Figure 7: A cluster similarity graph adds yet an-
other information dimension.



visual exploration of very large datasets. Brushing, interac-
tive picking and drill down are well supported by the kd-tree
index and the access method for subspace search and range
query. With database support, only aggregation or part of
data that are needed in rendering are retrieved. Categorical
variables are processed in the same way as continuous vari-
ables, provided that the orders of their distinct (or grouped)
values are listed explicitly or sorted numerically by aggre-
gate value of some other variable. A CAVE virtual reality
environment is at our disposal for 3D immersive display.
The use of the CAVE virtual environment maximizes the
chance of finding patterns. Add-on features and interaction
tools invite viewer's interaction with data. This approach of
multidimensional visualization provides a natural metaphor
to visualize large datasets and data clusters by mapping the
data onto a time-indexed family of 3D natural projections
suitable for human eye's exploration.

The n23Tool scales well to large datasets. The computa-
tional complexity of tour is linear to the number of vari-
ables. The number of variables matters only in calculating
dot products which has a linear complexity to the dimen-
sionality of arguments. Making projections and scatterplots
have a computational complexity linear to the number of
data points. This is in the sense that all data points have
to be projected one by one. With volume rendering, this
complexity can be greatly reduced. Whatever how big an
original dataset is, volume rendering takes the binned and
aggregated relational data as input.

The n23Tool represents a new data mining strategy that al-
lows users to understand both the process of mining and
the data at hand. The cluster-guided tour is a way to use
data mining as a drive for visualization, that is, clustering
identifies homogenous sub-populations of data, and the sub-
populations are used to help design the path of a tour. The
same principle applies to other data mining techniques, for




242

instance, to identify the significant rules produced by classi-
fication and rule induction. We hope that the n23Tool will
be useful to visually explore results generated by other data
mining techniques. This remains as one of the future work.


9. REFERENCES
[1] D. Asimov. The grand tour: A tool for viewing
multidimensional data. SIAM Journal of Science and
Statistical Computing, 6(1):128Г143, Jan. 1985.

[2] B. G. Becker. Volume rendering for relational data. In
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis'97), Phoenix, Arizona, Oct. 1997.

[3] J. L. Bentley. Multidimensional binary search trees
used for associative searching. Commun. ACM,
18(9):509Г517, 1975.

[4] C. L. Blake, E. Keogh, and C. Merz. UCI repository of
machine learning databases, 1998.
http://www.ics.uci.edu/mlearn/MLRepository.html.

[5] D. Cook and A. Buja. Manual controls for
high-dimensional data projections. Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics, 6(4):464Г480,
1997.

[6] D. R. Cook, A. Buja, and J. Cabrera. Grand tour and
projection pursuit. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics, 4(3):155Г172, 1995.

[7] C. Cruz-Neira, D. J. Sandin, T. DeFanti, R. Kenyon,
and H. J, C. The CAVE audio visual experience
automatic virtual environment. Commun. ACM,
35(1):64Г72, 1992.

[8] I. S. Dhillon, D. S. Modha, and W. S. Spangler.
Visualizing class structure of high-dimensional data.
In Proc. of 30th Symp. Interface: Computer Science
and Statistics, Jan. 1998.

[9] J. Friedman and J. Tukey. A projection pursuit
algorithm for exploratory data analysis. IEEE Trans.
Comput., 23:881Г890, 1974.

[10] C. Hurley and A. Buja. Analyzing high-dimensional
data with motion graphics. SIAM Journal on
Scientific and Statistical Computing, 11(6):1193Г1211,
1990.

[11] R. Little and D. Rubin. Statistical Analysis With
Missing Data. Wiley, New York, 1987.

[12] J. T. Robinson. The K-D-B-tree: A search structure
for large multidimensional dynamic indexes. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD Conference, pages
10Г18, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 1981.

[13] D. F. Swayne, D. Cook, and A. Buja. XGobi:
Interactive dynamic data visualization in the X
window system. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics, 7(1):113Г130, 1998.

[14] J. Symanzik, D. Cook, B. D. Kohlmeyer, U. Lechner,
and C. Cruz-Neira. Dynamic statistical graphics in the
c2 virtual environment. In Second World Conference
of the International Association for Statistical
Computing, Pasadena, California, USA, Feb. 1997.

[15] D. Talbert and D. Fisher. Exploiting sample-data
distributions to reduce the cost of nearest-neighbor
searches with kd-trees. In Proceedings of IDA'99,
LNCS 1642, pages 407Г414. Springer, 1999.

[16] R. van Teylingen, W. Ribarsky, and C. van der Mast.
Virtual data visualizer. IEEE Trans. Visualization
Computer Graphics, 3(1), January-March 1997.

[17] M. Ward. High dimensional brushing for interactive
exploration of multivariate data. In Proceedings of
Visualization'95, pages 271Г278, 1995.

[18] L. Westover. Footprint evaluation for volume
rendering. ACM Computer Graphics, 24(4):367Г376,
Aug. 1990.




243

