Genome Scale Prediction of Protein Functional Class from
Sequence using Data Mining
Ross D. King
Department of Computer
Science

University of Wales,
Aberystwyth

Penglais, Aberystwyth

SY23 3DB, Wales, U.K

+44 1970 622432

rdk@aber.ac.uk
Andreas Karwath
Department of Computer
Science

University of Wales,
Aberystwyth

Penglais, Aberystwyth

SY23 3DB, Wales, U.K

+44 1970 621922

aak97@aber.ac.uk
Amanda Clare
Department of Computer
Science

University of Wales,
Aberystwyth

Penglais, Aberystwyth

SY23 3DB, Wales, U.K

+44 1970 621922

ajc99@aber.ac.uk
Luc Dehaspe
Department of Computer
Science, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven

PharmaDM

Celestijnenlaan 200A,

B-3001, Belgium

++32 16 327643

Luc.Dehaspe@PharmaDM.com



ABSTRACT
The ability to predict protein function from amino acid sequence
is a central research goal of molecular biology. Such a capability
would greatly aid the biological interpretation of the genomic data
and accelerate its medical exploitation.
For the existing
sequenced genomes function can be assigned to typically only
between 40-60% of the genes [4,8,12,7]. The new science of
functional genomics is dedicated to discovering the function of
these genes, and to further detailing gene function [10,27,17,6].
Here we present a novel data-mining [24,18] approach to
predicting protein functional class from sequence.
We
demonstrate
the
effectiveness
of
this
approach
on
the
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
[8]
genome.
Biologically
interpretable rules are identified that can predict protein function
even in the absence of identifiable sequence homology. These
rules predict 65% of the genes with no previous assigned function
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the bacteria which causes TB)
with an estimated accuracy of 60-80% (depending on the level of
functional assignment).
The rules give insight into the
evolutionary history of the organism.


Categories and Subject
Database Applications, Learning, Life and Medical Sciences


General Terms
Data mining, Concept learning, Biology and genetics.


1. INTRODUCTION
The formation of a theory to explain a set of observations is
central to science.
Computer based methods to assist in this
process are becoming increasingly important [20]. Such methods
are especially needed in molecular biology, where there is an
overwhelming flood of new data.
Here we demonstrate the
effectiveness of automatic scientific discovery on an important
scientific problem. We successfully apply a novel data mining
approach to the problem of predicting protein functional class
from sequence.
To predict the biological functional class of proteins directly
from sequence what is abstractly required is a discrimination
function [10] that maps sequence to biological function.
To predict protein function directly from sequence what is
abstractly required is a discrimination function10 that maps
sequence to biological function. The existing sequence homology
recognition methods can be viewed as examples of such
functions: methods based on direct sequence similarity [23,2] can
be considered as nearest neighbour type functions [11] (in
sequence space), and the more complicated homology recognition
methods based on motifs/profiles [28] resemble case-based
learning functions [1]. The creation of annotated databases of
protein function has now opened up the possibility of
automatically identifying more general forms of discrimination
function using data.


2. DATA
For analysis, we selected the tuberculosis genome, probably
the
prokaryote
genome
of
greatest
medical
importance.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), tuberculosis
kills 2 million people each year. Their concern about the growing
epidemic has led the WHO to declare tuberculosis a global
emergency [15].
We used 3,924 genes [8] * (over 4 million base pairs) with
functional class assignments from the Sanger Centre [14]. (Note
that there are errors in annotation of function [5], and this adds
"noise" to the data mining process [18]). The assignments of
function are organised in a strict hierarchy (tree), where each
higher level in the tree is more general than the level below it, and




*
For readability reasons we used "gene" throughout the paper,
knowing that "potenial gene" or open reading frame (ORF)
should be used.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
KDD 2000, Boston, MA USA
© ACM 2000 1-58113-233-6/00/08 ...$5.00




384

Small-molecule metabolism

Macro molecule metabolism...

Cell... Processes...

Other...
Degradation

Energy Metabolism...

Central intermediary
metabolism...

Amino acid biosynthesis...

Polyamine synthesis...

Purines, pyrimidines, nucleosides
and nucleotides...
Carbon compounds

Amino acids and amines

Fatty acids

Phosphorous compounds




Biosynthesis of cofactors, prosthetic
groups and carriers...

Lipid Biosynthesis...

Polyketide and non-ribosomal
peptide synthesis...

Broad regulatory functions...
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3




Figure 1. An example subset of the genes functional hierarchy. This example has

only three out of four possible classification levels.

the leaf nodes are the individual functions of proteins.
A
subsection of the function hierarchy is shown in figure 1.
For example, a typical protein in the tubercle bacillus is L-
fuculose phosphate aldolase (Rv0727c fucA), its top-level class
assignment is "Small-molecule metabolism", its second-level class
is "Degradation", and its third-level class is "Carbon compounds".
We attempted to learn discriminatory functions for every level of
the functional hierarchy. Success on these different levels would
demonstrate the generality of the approach.
To generate the database to mine we formed a single
deductive database of genes and their known functional
assignments.
We then processed this data to form sequence
descriptions of the genes. Therefore, these descriptions are solely
based on features that can be computed from sequence alone. The
most commonly used technique to gain information about a
sequence is to run a sequence similarity search, and this was used
as the starting point in forming descriptions.
The basic data
structure in the deductive database is the result of a PSI-BLAST
search [2] (we used the parameters: e = 10, h = 0.0005, j = 20,
NRProt 16/11/98). NRProt is a protein sequence database
merging together protein sequences with less than 100 percent
sequence identity from a variety of multi-genome protein
databases. Using each gene, and each protein identified as having
sequence similarity to it, we formed an expressive description
based on: the frequency of singlets and pairs of residues in the
gene; the phylogeny ("family tree") of the organism from which
each protein was obtained - from SWISS-PROT [3] (a standard
protein database); SWISS-PROT protein keywords (membrane,
transmembrane,
inner_membrane,
outer_membrane,
repeat,
plasmid, and alternative_splicing); and the length and molecular
weight of the gene. This description resembles a "phylogenic
profile" [17], but is more general and expressive. In total
5,895,649 facts were generated. Table 2 shows the available
database facts and their description.


3. DATA MINING METHOD
We then mined this database to generate rules that predict
protein functional class from sequence description. This was done
using a combination of clustering and rule learning (see Figure 2).
This hybrid approach has proved successful in the past on
other scientific discovery tasks [9]. It is powerful because
clustering improves the representation for learning (using the
expressive power of inductive logic programming ­ ILP [19]),
and discrimination efficiently exploits the pre-labeled examples.
WARMR [9] is an ILP data mining algorithm that is used to
identify frequent patterns (conjunctive queries) in the sequence
descriptions. In this experiment roughly 18,000 frequent queries
were discovered. These were converted into 18,000 Boolean
attributes for rule learning, where an attribute gets value 1 for a
specific gene if the corresponding query succeeds for that gene.
Conversely, if the query fails, the corresponding attribute is
assigned value 0.
The machine learning algorithms C4.5 and C5 [26] were
used to induce rules that predict function from the attributes.
Good rules were selected on a validation set, and the unbiased
accuracy of these rules estimated on a test set.
Rules were
selected to balance accuracy with unidentified gene coverage. In
general the correct balance of accuracy and coverage for any
particular application depends on the relative cost of making
errors of commission and omission [25] (making incorrect
predictions v missing genes). The system can be tuned to select




385

Table 1. Database facts and their description. These facts are generated for each of the genes.

Database argument
Description
hom(A)
refers to a homologous protein (A) found by PSI-BLAST.
keyword(A, Word)
refers to a SwissProt keyword found in A.
classification(A, Class)
refers to the phylogenic classification of the organism A came from, taken from SwissProt.
species(A, Species)
refers to the species of A, taken from SwissProt.
mol_wt_rule(A, Weight)
refers to the molecular weight of A: 1 very low, 2 low, 3 medium, 4 high, and 5 very high.
amino_acid_ratio_rule(A,
Residue, Weight)
refers to the percentage composition of the residue in the sequence.


e_val_rule(A, Weight)
refers to the PSI-Blast sequence similarity measure (note that a low value means a high
sequence similarity).
e_val_gt(Value)
e_val_lteq(Value)
refers to the PSI-Blast sequence similarity measure, greater than or less than/equal to a
certain value
mol_wt_lteq(A, Weight)
mol_wt_gt(A, Weight)
refers to the molecular weight of A being greater than or less than/equal to some value


amino_acid_pairs_wg()
and others similar, refers to the number of pairs of these two amino acids, in this case
tryptophan and glycine

amino_acid_pair_ratio_qh
(Ratio)
and others similar, refers to the ratio of one amino acid to another in the gene, in this case
the ratio of glutamine(q) to histidine(h). This ratio is not a percentage, not out of a hundred,
instead it's a ratio out of a thousand. So for example 2.8 means 0.28%.
amino_acid_ratio_g
(Percentage)
and others similar, refers to the percentage composition of the residue in the sequence of
the gene, in this case the percentage of glycine
psi_iter_gt(Number)
psi_iter_lteq(Number)
refers to the number of iterations of the PSI_BLAST search (greater than or less than/equal
to some number)




R ule learning
using C 4.5 & C 5.0
G enerate seq ue nc e
descriptions




freque nt pattern
disco very
using W A R M R
G ene s o f assigned functio n




D ataba se for rule learning
(single relation)

2 /3
1/3




R ules
S elected R ule s
M ethod
V alidation
G ene s o f una ssigned functio n




Te sting



Predictions
E xperime ntal
C onfirmatio n?
D ataba se for freq ue nt pattern disco very
(multi-relational)

2/3
1/3




Figure 2. Flow chart of the data mining methodology. The genes of known functions were split randomly, one third to be held
out for the final testing and two thirds to be used to generate prediction rules. The data used to generate the rules were in turn
split randomly, two thirds to actually generate the rules and one third to be used as validation set for selecting good rules
according to accuracy and coverage. After the selection of good rules, we tested their accuracy on the held-out test data, and
also used them to predict biological function for the genes of currently unknown function (classified as "Unkown" or
"Conserved Hypotheticals").




386

Table 2. The number of rules found are those selected on
the validation set. A rule predicts more than one homology
class if there is more than one sequence similarity cluster in
the correct test predictions.
A rule predicts a new
homology class if there is a sequence similarity cluster in
the test predictions that has no members in the training
data.
Average test accuracy is the accuracy of the
predictions on the test proteins of assigned function (if
conflicts occur, the prediction with the highest a priori
probability is chosen). Default test accuracy is the accuracy
that could be achieved by always selecting the most
populous class. "New functions assigned" is the number of
genes of unassigned function predicted.


Level
1
Level
2
Level
3
Level
4

Number of rules
found
25
30
20
3


Rules predicting more
than one homology
class
19
18
8
1



Rules predicting a
new homology class
14
15
1
0


Average test accuracy
62%
65%
62%
76%

Default test accuracy
48%
14%
6%
2%

New functions
assigned
886
(58%)
507
(33%)
60
(4%)
19
(1%)
Figure 3. Example rule found for the Macromolecule
metabolism functional class.
If

the percentage composition of lysine in the gene is > 6.6%

Then

the ORF has the functional class "Macromolecule
metabolism"




Figure 4. A more complex rule for the classification of
"Degradation of macromolecules".
different balances.
The prediction rules were then applied to
genes that have not been assigned a function.


4. RESULTS
It was possible to find good rules that predict function from
sequence at all levels of the functional hierarchies, as shown in
Table 2.
The test accuracy of these rules is far higher than possible by
chance. Of the genes originally in the "Conserved Hypothetical"
or "Unknown" function classes, 985 (65%) were predicted to have
a function at one or more levels of the hierarchy. The rule learning
data,
the
rules,
and
the
predictions,
are
given
at:
http://www.aber.ac.uk/~dcswww/Research/bio/ProteinFunction/.
We illustrate the value of the rules by describing rule
TB_C50_1_26 shown in figure 3.




This top-level rule is 85% (11/13) accurate on the test set
(the probability of this result occurring by chance is estimated at
1.2x10-5 as the class Macromolecule metabolism covers ~25% of
examples).
The rule correctly predicts the following proteins
(rpsG (S7), rpsI (S9), rpsL (S12), rpsT (S20), rplJ (L10), rplP
(L16), rplS (L19), rplX (L24), rpmE (L31), rpmJ (L36), infC (IF-
3)). These proteins are all involved in protein translation. When
the training data are included the rule covers 46 out of the 58
proteins known to be involved in ribosomal protein synthesis and
modification. The two errors (of commission) made in the test
data were groEL2 a "60 kD Chaperonin 2 gene" and Rv3583c a
"putative transcriptional regulator". The rule predicts the function
of five genes classed as "Conserved Hypotheticals" (Rv566,
Rv854, Rv910, Rv2185, Rv2708) and ten genes classed as
"Unknowns" (Rv123, Rv810, Rv909, Rv1893, Rv1955, Rv2061,
Rv2517, Rv2819, Rv2822, Rv3718).
The prediction rule is
consistent with protein chemistry, as lysine is positively charged
which is desirable for interaction with negatively charged RNA.
The choice of lysine over arginine for the positively charged
residue may be connected with the high GC content of the M.
tuberculosis genome [8] - lysine is coded by the codons AAA and
AAG; while arg is coded by CGU, CGC, CGA, CGG; and his by
CAT and CAC.
Not all rules are as simple as the example in figure 3, a more
complex rule is shown in figure 4. This rule predicts the level two
functional class "Degradation of macromolecules". The rule is
62.5% accurate (5/8) on the test set. It predicts 3 genes, which are
currently classified as "Unknown" or "Conserved Hypothetical".
The errors of commission are rplV (synthesis and modification of
macromolecules), Rv1566 (Virulence) and ponA2
(penicillin
binding protein).
The approach described in this paper is the first that can
systematically find rules not based on homology. To show this we
carried out all-against-all PSI-BLAST searches for those proteins
correctly predicted by each rule. If all the proteins could be linked
together by PSI-BLAST scores < 10 then the proteins were
considered homologous. It was found that many of the predictive
rules were more general than possible using sequence homology.
If
there exists a homologous protein in SwissProt with the
keyword "membrane" and
there exists a homologous protein in Bacillus subtilis
and there does not exist a homologous protein with very
low molecular weight, a large percentage of glutamic acid,
and medium sequence similarity
and there does not exist a homologous protein in SwissProt
with good sequence similarity, low percentage of cysteine,
the keyword "transmembrane" and a fairly high molecular
weight
there does not exist a firmicutes sp. protein in SwissProt
with the keyword "transmembrane", with medium molecular
weight, and a very high amount of low entropy sequence
and there exists a homologous mammalian protein in
SwissProt with the keyword "repeat" with very high
molecular weight
Then
the ORF has the functional class "Degradation of
macromolecules".




387

This was shown in two ways: the rules correctly predict the
function of sets of proteins that are not homologous to each other,
and they correctly predict the function of proteins that are not
homologous to any in the training data (Table 1). Such rules
provide a way of predicting function in the absence of
recognisable sequence homology. The other rules, those of equal
power to sequence homology, are also valuable as they provide a
novel way of detecting homology.


5. DISCUSSION
The discovered rules are important in two ways: they make
predictions that are useful in determining the functions of genes of
currently unknown function, and they provide evolutionary
insight. The actual function of a gene can only be determined by
"wet" experiment. However, bioinformatic techniques such as
sequence homology detection, and the prediction rules presented
here, can make such experimental determination simpler. It is
clearly more efficient to test a high probability hypothesis than to
randomly test for possible functions. We look forward to the
testing of our predictions by other workers, and we are designing
automatic methods to test the rules ourselves.
The existence of general rules for predicting biological
function raises the question of their evolutionary causation. How
are such rules possible, given the notoriously complicated
mappings between function and structure, and structure and
sequence? Several possibilities exist: the rules are paralogous
[16] with homology so distant as to be undetectable by sequence
analysis; convergent evolution has occurred, forcing proteins with
similar function to resemble each other; or horizontal evolution
has transferred functional related groups of protein into the
organisms. Evidence in favour of a role for distant homology is
that it is possible to predict function better than random based on
predicted secondary structure alone, and secondary structure is
better conserved over evolution than sequence [22]. Evidence
against this is that we have found little evidence for common
SCOP database [21] "superfamily" and "fold" classifications for
proteins predicted by the same rule. Convergent evolution seems
to be the dominant factor in rules such as TB_C50_1_26 (Figure
3). Evidence for horizontal transfer of genes into M. tuberculosis
is the importance of phylogeny in many rules where a paralogous
explanation seems to be ruled out.


6. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the utility of automatic knowledge
discovery techniques by showing that they can discover prediction
rules that are effective and of biological interest in functional
genomics. The data mining approach described is extendable to
analysis of other forms of bioinformatic data, such as expression
profiles, pathway analysis, structural studies, etc. [10,27,17,6].
Information from all these diverse approaches will be able to be
combined together to produce more powerful predictions than any
single one in isolation.


7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Douglas B. Kell and Michael Young
from IBS and Mohammed Ouali from Computer Science, at the
University of Wales, Aberystwyth; Ashwin Srinivasan of the
Computing Laboratory at the University of Oxford; and Steffen
Schulze-Kremer at the Resource Centre of the German Human
Genome Project for helpful discussions. This work was supported
by EPSRC, MRC, and British Council. Luc Dehaspe is a Fellow
of the K. U. Leuven Research Council.


8. REFERENCES
[1] Aha, D., Kibler, D., Albert, M., Instance-based
learning algorithms. Machine Learning 6, 37-66
(1991).

[2] Altschul, S. F. et al., Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
a new generation of protein database search programs.
Nucl. Acid Res., 25, 3389-3402 (1997).

[3] Bairoch, A., Apweiler, R., The SWISSPROT protein
sequence data bank and its new supplement TrEMBL
in 1999. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 49-54 (1999).

[4] Blattner, F. R. et al., The complete genome sequence
of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 277, 1453-1461
(1997).

[5] Brenner, S. E., Errors in gene annotation. Trends in
Genetics 15, 132-133 (1999).

[6] Brown, M. P. S. et al., Knowledge-based analysis of
microarray gene expression data by using support
vector machines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 97, 262-
267 (2000).

[7] C. elegans Sequencing Consortium, Genome Sequence
of the Nematode C. elegans: A Platform for
Investigating Biology Science 282, 2012-2018 (1998).

[8] Cole, S. T. et al., Deciphering the biology of
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
from
the
complete
genome sequence. Nature 393, 537-544 (1998).

[9] Dehaspe, L., Toivonen, H., King, R. D., Finding
frequent substructures in chemical compounds. in
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Agrawal, R.,
Stolorez, P., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., eds. (AAAI Press,
Menlo Park, 1998) pp. 30-36.

[10]DeRisi, J. L., Iyer, V. R., Brown, P. O., Exploring the
metabolic and genetic control of gene expression on a
genomic scale. Science 278, 680-686 (1997).

[11]Duda, R., Hart, P., Pattern Classification and Scene
Analysis (John Wiley, New York, 1973).

[12]Goffeau, A. et al., Life with 6000 genes. Science 274,
546-567 (1996).

[13]Henikoff, S., et al. Gene families: the taxonomy of
protein paralogs and chimeras. Science 278 609-614
(1997)

[14]http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/M_tuberculosis/gene
_list_full.shtm (15/03/1999).

[15]http://www.who.int/inf-fs/en/fact104.html




388

[16]Kell, D., King, R. D., On the optimization of classes
for the assignment of unidentified reading frames in
functional genomics programmes: the need for machine
learning. Trends in Biotechnology 18, 93-98 (2000).

[17]Marcotte, E. M., Pellegrine, M., Thompson, M. J.,
Yeates, T. O., Eisenberg, D., A combined algorithm for
genome wide prediction of protein function. Nature
402, 83-86 (1999).

[18]Mitchell, T. M., Machine Learning (McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1997).

[19]Muggleton, S., Inductive logic programming New
Generation Computing 8, 295-318 (1991).

[20]Munakata, T., Knowledge Discovery. Comm. ACM 41
26-29 (1999)

[21]Murzin, A. G., Brenner, S. E., Hubbard, T., Chothia,
C., SCOP: a structural classification of proteins
database for the investigation of sequences and
structures. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 536-540 (1995).

[22]Park, J., Teichmann, S. A., Hubbard, T., Chothia, C.,
Intermediate Sequences Increase the Detection of
Homology Between Sequences. J. Mol. Biol. 273, 349-
354 (1997).
[23]Pearson, W. R., Lipman, D. J., Improved tools for
biological sequence comparison. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 85, 2444-2448 (1988).

[24]Piatetsky-Shapiro,
G.,
Frawley
W.,
Knowledge
Discovery in Databases (MIT Press, 1991).

[25]Provost, F., Fawcett, T., Analysis and Visualization of
Classifier Performance: Comparison under Imprecise
Class and Cost Distributions. In Proceedings of KDD-
97 Heckerman, D., Mannila, H., Pregibon, D., eds.
(AAAI Press, Menlo Park, 1997) pp 43-48.

[26]Quinlan, R., C4.5: Programs for machine learning
(Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 1993).

[27]Tatusov, R. L., Koonin, E. V., Lipman, D. J., A
Genomic Perspective on Protein Families Science 278,
631-637 (1997).

[28]Taylor, W. R., Dynamic Sequence Databank Searching
with Templates and Multiple Alignments. J. Mol. Biol.,
280, 375-406 (1998).




389

