Data-driven Validation, Completion and Construction of
Event Relationship Networks


Chang-Shing Perng
1
David Thoenen
Genady Grabarnik
Sheng Ma
Joseph Hellerstein

IBM T. J. Watson Research
1
IBM Advanced Technical Support
{perng,genady,shengma,hellers}@us.ibm.com
thoenen@us.ibm.com



ABSTRACT
Event management is a focal point in building and main-
taining high quality information infrastructures. We have
witnessed the shift of the paradigm of event management in
practice from root cause analysis (RCA) to action-oriented
analysis (AOA). IBM has developed a pioneer event manage-
ment methodology (EMD) based on the AOA paradigm and
applied it to more than two hundred production sites with
success. Foreseeably, more and more event management
professionals will apply AOA in different incarnations in
building proactive management facilities. By that, building
correct and effective Event Relationship Networks (ERNs)
becomes the dominating activity in AOA service design pro-
cess. Currently, the quality of ERNs and the cost of building
them largely depend on the knowledge of domain experts.
We believe that we can utilize historical event logs in short-
ening the ERNs design process and perfecting the quality
of ERNs. In this paper, we describe in detail how to apply
this data-driven approach in ERN validation, completion
and construction.


Keywords
Event Relationship Networks, Action Oriented-Analysis, Root
Cause Analysis, Event Management Methodology, Proactive
Management, ERN Validation, ERN Construction


1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we propose a method of applying recently
developed data mining techniques in validating, completing
and constructing event relationship networks (ERNs).

1.1 Background
High quality event management has long been seen as
the cornerstone of a healthy business and IT operation en-
vironment. As every business is becoming e-business, the
demand from IT service customers has evolved from reac-
tive management toward proactive management. Enormous




Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGKDD '03, August 24-27, 2003, Washington, DC, USA
Copyright 2003 ACM 1-58113-737-0/03/0008 ...$5.00.
academic research and commercial products have attempted
to achieve proactive management by root cause analysis
(RCA). However, what RCA can provide does not match
well with the need of the two primary goals of event man-
agement:

1. Rapid detection of problems and a fast response to
exceptional situations, and

2. Precise and accurate identification of the problem scope
(hosts, networks, people, etc.)

In response to these real-world operational demands, David
Thoenen [11] proposed action-oriented analysis (AOA) as a
new paradigm for event management. In the paper, the
concepts of AOA is concretized as the Event Management
Design (EMD) methodology which contains four activities:

1. Select the event sources

2. Take inventory of all events

3. Document event policies and processing decisions

4. Construct ERNs for correlation analysis

By examining these activities, we can see that activity 1 is
pretty straightforward for system administrators since im-
portant event sources (Unix servers, NT servers, NetWare
Severs, hubs, routers, ATM switches, UPS systems, appli-
cations, web servers, database servers, etc) are very easy to
identify. Activity 2 mostly relies on the quality and cover-
age of service providers' event source repertoires and their
domain knowledge. Activity 3 is to customize policy specifi-
cation and make processing decisions for the particular oper-
ation environment based on its special requirements. Activ-
ity 4 is to construct Event Relationship Networks (ERNs), a
graphical representation of how events are correlated. IBM
Global Service has developed a software tool that translates
a set of ERNs along with a default action template to event
correlation rules ready to be used in event correlation en-
gines like Tivoli Enterprise Console. So activity 4 is the
pivotal step of the EMD methodology. Proportional to the
significance, activity 4 usually requires the most time and
domain expertise in our experience.
ERN construction can be significantly speeded up if the
service providers have corresponding ERNs in their knowl-
edge base. However, there are roughly too many types of
event sources currently working in business environments
that might be taken into event management. Considering
the tremendous diversity of event sources, such advantage



729

should not be expected. Furthermore, the same type of
event sources may be configured very differently in differ-
ent operation environments. Also, the decisions on event
processing policies may invalidate ERNs constructed under
different policies. These constraints indicate that revising
and constructing ERNs are unavoidable in most cases. Con-
sider a typical operation environment containing 20 event
sources and 100 enterprise significant event types (event
types that are important in problem determination) for each
event source, domain and device experts have to mentally
figure out all the autonomous events among the 2000 event
types and the correlations among the rest, and document
them into ERNs. The time and cost for constructing ERNs
is enormous.
Beside the cost of constructing ERNs, the correctness and
effectiveness of ERNs also have a great impact to the per-
formance of event management. On one hand, incomplete
ERNs cause correlation engines fail to correlate events that
are symptoms of the same problem and initiate more than
enough notifications or actions, and thus deteriorate the sec-
ond goal of event management. On the other hand, incorrect
ERNs cause correlation engines fail to take proper actions
or notify right people, and thus violate the first goal of event
management. The worst of all, ERNs can be both incom-
plete and incorrect. The need of a method to validate and
construct ERNs based on true and complete correlations is
apparent.
Conceptually, true and complete event correlations are
impossible to obtain because operational environments are
always changing. However, the past is still the best indi-
cator of the future. It is the de facto capability of event
correlation servers and middle layer managers to maintain
event repositories, typically in relational databases. This
historical event data provides the most reliable evidences of
how a type of event is temporally correlated to other types
of events. Our experience shows the correlation implied in
event data is very useful in confirming domain experts' hy-
potheses and, sometimes, providing surprising facts.

1.2 Event Data

Time
Host
Event Type
Feb 25 00:40:59
host1
Node Up
Feb 25 00:40:59
host2
Interface Up
Feb 25 00:40:59
host2
Node Marginal
Feb 25 00:40:59
host3
Interface Up
Feb 25 00:40:59
host3
Node Up
Feb 25 00:40:59
host4
Interface Up
Feb 25 00:40:59
host4
Node Marginal
Feb 25 00:40:59
host5
Segment Down
Feb 25 00:40:59
host5
Network Up
Feb 25 00:41:00
host6
Interface Down
Feb 25 00:41:00
host6
Node Down

Table 1: An event log (sanitized)


Table 1 shows a typical segment of IBM NetView recep-
tion logs. By examining the NetView event log, we can see
evidences that support some commonly believed correlations
like those between Node Up and Interface Up and those be-
tween Node Down and Interface Down. We can also see cer-
tain correlations that might somewhat surprise ERN design-
ers. For example, we can see there are two cases (host2 and
host 4) that Interface Up is correlated with Node Marginal
while Interface Up is commonly regarded as an indicator
that the host has been restored from non-operational status
but a Node Marginal event indicates the host is likely over-
loaded. Provided such observation, domain experts can look
into the phenomena and determine the meaning of the cor-
relation. It is most likely to be the case that Node Marginal
is simply a transient state when a host is restoring the con-
nection of the inte rface so host2 and host4 are working
normally after 00:40:59. If an ERN designer erroneously
consider every Node Marginal as a problem, the consequence
is twofold. First, many unnecessary trouble tickets will be
issued. Second, the produced correlation rules could cause
the correlation engine to keep those events in local cache all
the time hence degrade the pattern matching performance.
Based on the above observations, we believe a data-driven
ERN validation, completion and construction tool is not
only convenient but essential to fast deployment of AOA
event management.

1.3 Organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
is a brief review of ERNs. In Section 3, the event statisti-
cal correlation model is defined. In Section 4, we present
the data-driven approach and the statistics of correlation
strength. The algorithms of ERN VCC (Validation, Com-
pletion, Construction) systems are discussed in Section 5. A
case study is presented in Section 6. In Section 7, we discuss
the related work. Section 8 concludes the paper.


2. A BRIEF REVIEW OF ERN
Our approach to describing correlation logic uses a con-
ceptual framework called Event Relationship Networks (ERNs).
An ERN is a directed acyclic graph. Nodes are events and
are labeled with the roles of the events within the case. Arcs
from one event to the next indicate that the latter is asso-
ciated with the former. A simple event relationship net-
work for a Cisco router is shown in Figure 1. The Cisco
Environment Monitoring agent emits temperature warning,
critical, and shutdown events as temperature incidents es-
calate. As temperature readings return to acceptable ranges
the agent emits a normal event.




Figure 1: ERN for Cisco Temperature Notification

We now introduce a key concept: event roles. An event
plays a primary role (is a primary event) if it provides an
immediate, often unambiguous, indication as to the correc-



730

tive action to take. For example, if a warning trap is the
first event in the correlation case, then it is a primary event.
Proactive management uses the receipt of a primary event
to trigger a first level of response. Referring to Figure 1, the
role of the ciscoEnvMonTemperatureNotificationWarning
event is primary within the context of this example correla-
tion case.
An event plays a secondary role (is a secondary event) if it
is always extraneous in terms of selecting the corrective ac-
tion in an exceptional situation. Although secondary events
do not affect the choice of correct action, they may invoke
actions of their own.
If events were always either primary or secondary, then
correlation would be much less complex. However, in a large
number of cases, the role of an event depends on context
within the correlation case. Events that may be either a pri-
mary or a secondary are called primary/secondary events.
Within our example correlation case two events act in the
role of primary/secondary, the
ciscoEnvMonTemperatureNotificationCritical and the
ciscoEnvMonTemperatureNotificationWarning events. The
last event role is to identify the end of an incident, we refer
to these as clearing events.
CiscoEnvMonTemperatureNotificationNormal acts in the
role of the clearing event in the example above.

3. EVENT CORRELATION

3.1 Correlation Models
The operational purpose of constructing ERNs is to in-
struct correlation engines a proper way to process events.
So the semantics of the links in ERNs should be interpreted
as the way correlation servers work. Correlation servers can
be modeled as a rule-based triggering system with an event
cache. At any moment, the event cache contains events
received during the last period of a predefined duration.
The rule-based triggering system examines the content of
the event cache and determines whether any trigger rule
should fire. In this model, event correlation is a tempo-
ral relationship. Such correlation capabilities are at the
heart of systems management, as indicated by the popular-
ity of the products such as the Tivoli Event Console (TEC),
Boole's Command Post, Computer Associate's Unicenter,
and Hewlett Packard's OpenView.

3.2 Correlation Semantics
We propose two types of semantics for ERNs based on cor-
relation strength: weak correlation and strong correlation.

An ERN is valid in weak correlation if all
links have confidences higher than a given
threshold.

The confidence of a link is the likelihood that the two linked
events are emitted together and in that order. We will soon
see more rigorous definitions of the statistics we use to de-
note link confidence.
However, the sum of pairwise correlation does not nec-
essary show the whole picture, especially when the given
threshold is low. Hence we introduce the notion of strong
correlation.

An ERN is valid in strong correlation if the
links between any node and all its transi-
tive successors are valid.
Both semantics require a way to compute link confidences.
Here we define the confidences in statistics terms. Given
a reasonable window length w that will be set as the time
window of the event cache. For each link (A,B), we compute
the following statistics ConfAB = NA,P(B|A),2AB .

· NA: the total number occurrences of event type A.
NA indicates whether the event type A as well as the
link worth to be included in an ERN. In a sense, NA
represents the possible cost of applying ERNs without
this link. As previously stated, incomplete ERN can
cause unnecessary trouble tickets. The cost of process-
ing these redundant trouble tickets caused by missing
link (A,B) is proportional to NA. So for large NA, it
is suggested to include the link if other statistics also
indicate high correlation. For small NA, the cost of
the decision is up to domain experts' judgments.

· P(B|A): The conditional probability that an occur-
rence of event type A is followed by an occurrence of
event type B within time no later than w. This is
defined as:
number of windows containing both A and B
the number of windows contain A
.


· 2AB: The 2 test score of A-B coupling which indi-
cates the deviation of A and B's distribution from ran-
dom distribution. High 2AB score indicate it is likely
that the two events happen not due to randomness.

The 2AB test score is defined through the following statis-
tics. The probability of observing an event A in a window is
PA = NA/T where T is the time covered in the log. The ex-
pected probability of finding both event A and event B in a
window with event A occurring before event B is E(PAB) =
PA × PB/2. The actual probability of finding both event
A and event B in a window with event A occurring before
event B is P(B|A) =
NAB
2T
where NAB is the number of
(A,B) event pairs. The variance of co-occurrences of event
A and event B is defined as V ARAB =
PAB(1-PAB)
T
. The
2 test score is defined as 2AB =
(P(B|A)-E(PAB))2
V ARAB
.
Thresholds of link confidence are also in the form of a
triple Nt,Pt,2t such that a link (A,B) is valid if NA  Nt,
PAB  Pt, and 2AB  2t.
Note that it is possible that both links (A,B) and (B,A)
are valid. In such cases, we suggest the direction of link
(A,B) should be from A to B if P(B|A) > P(A|B), other-
wise, the direction should be from B to A.


4. ERN VALIDATION, COMPLETION AND
CONSTRUCTION

4.1 ERN Validation
As we mentioned in Section 1, occasionally ERNs con-
structed in different installations or different time may be
used as starter sets. In such case, the task is to validate
whether the correlations specified in the existing ERNs are
valid in the environment of interest. The validation of weak
correlation is straightforward. Users specify the window
length w and the event log file. Then the ERN VCC system
annotates the nodes and links. The annotation format will
be soon clear in following examples.



731

Example 1. Figure 2 shows a simple ERN with three
nodes (event types) annotated by statistics obtained from an
event log of 90 days with specified window size 60 seconds.
The count of an event types is placed near the corresponding
node, e.g. Cisco link Down has 1014 occurrences. Each link
with arrow direct from A to B is annotated with two pairs
of probabilities and 2 score, namely (P(B|A),2AB) and
(P(A|B),2BA). For example, the link from Cisco Link Up
to Cisco Link Down has conditional probability 0.18 and 2
score 278. The reversed link has conditional probability 0.23
and 2 score 54. These statistics can be interpreted in the
following way. The forward conditional probability, 0.18,
is smaller than the backward conditional probability. Usu-
ally, this mean the direction of the link should be set re-
versed. However, since Cisco Link Up is a clearing event.
The link direction should remain unless the forward confi-
dence is smaller than threshold. Although the conditional
probabilities do not look significant at the first glance, the 2
scores, however, indicate other way. Consider the log his-
tory contain 129,600 non-overlapping windows, conditional
probabilities 0.18 and 0.23 are actually very high. This fact
is indicated by the 2 scores which imply the two events are
correlated with more than 99% confidence. The risk of miss-
ing the link (A,B) can be calculated as 1014  0.23 = 242.
Also, it is very clear that Cisco Cold Start should not be in-
cluded in this ERN because both the conditional probabilities
and 2 scores are 0.




Figure 2: An Annotated ERN


Validation of strong correlation is comparatively more com-
plicated and contains the following three steps:

1. Split the ERN to correlation paths. For every source
node, nodes with no incoming link, find paths to every
reachable sink node, nodes with no outgoing link.

2. For every correlation path, remove the node that has
the least number of correlated nodes, upstream or down-
stream, until every node has full correlation with every
other node.

3. Merge correlation paths to ERNs with a constraint
that every path in the result ERNs is a valid path in
step 2.

As implied by the definition of strong correlation, an ERN
might be split to several ERNs after strong correlation val-
idation.
4.2 ERN Completion
For a given ERN, the validation method just discussed
can identify incorrect links. But identifying missing nodes
and links from ERNs requires searching all event types to
find those correlated event types already in ERNs. This
completion process is done in an iterative manner. In each
iteration, all event types correlated to any event types in
current ERNs are attached with corresponding links. The
process proceeds till no more event type can be added.

Example 2. Our experience shows even very simple com-
pletion procedure can be very helpful to ERN designers. In
this case, as shown in Figure 3, we take an event type,
chassisMajorAlarmPS2, from a real production environment,
which does not seem to be correlated to other event types in
existing ERNs. However, by computing its correlation with
all event types shown in an event log, we found there are
22 event types that show strong pairwise correlation with the
event type. Among the 22 event types, 15 are clearing events,
one tends to occur before the target event and 6 tend to oc-
cur after the target event. The large number of event types
that were missing in the original ERNs is rather surprising
consider the event management teams, both consultants and
subject matter experts of the client side, are among the best
in the industry.




Figure 3: ERN Completion


4.3 ERN Construction
In situations where no existing ERN can be used for starter
sets, the ERN VCC system is responsible for generating
ERNs for subject matter experts to review. ERN construc-
tion can be treated as a special case of ERN completion
where no ERN is available. However, the corresponding
computation is more expensive because the system has to
start with computing all pairwise correlations instead of
with only those contain at least one event in existing ERNs.


5. ALGORITHM
Two major algorithms are needed in ERN VCC process:
network construction and link instance counting. The net-
work construction algorithm is the upper level algorithm
that decides the structure of ERNs based on link instance
counts. This algorithm for strong correlation has been dis-
cussed in Section 3. For weak correlation, the main task is to



732

stratify ERNs so the path between any two nodes, if exists,
is unique. Figure 10 shows a simple case of ERN stratifica-
tion. The principle of ERN stratification is to eliminate any
link two nodes that have longer paths between them. In this
case, there is a longer path from A to B then to C, so the
link from A to C should be eliminated. In the cases where
there is more than one longest path, eliminate the one with
the weakest link. In the cases where the links form a cycle,
the weakest link should be eliminated.




Figure 4: Stratification of ERNs

The link instance counting algorithm is the lower level
algorithm that counts for a given pair of events A and B.
Counting occurrences of event pairs that fall in windows of
specified length is a very fundamental issue in realization
of the ERN link validation. However, Contrary to most
people's first impression, counting is a very complex issue.
Due to the limit of space, instead of presenting the detail
algorithm, we only discuss the issues in counting.




Figure 5: Counting instances of event pairs

Figure 5 shows a situation where counting might result
non-unique answers. Suppose the time span from the first
event A to the first event B is less than the window length
but not to the second B, and the second event A is close
enough to both instances of event B. If events can be
counted multiple times, the count of event pair is 3. If mul-
tiple counting is not allowed, the result is 2 or 1 depending
on the rule of associating events.
In order to obtain unique count of event pairs, we adapt
the following two principles.

1. No reuse: every instance of event can be used only
once.

2. Earliest first: whenever there is more than one instance
of same type of event, always choose the one with ear-
liest timestamp.

These two principles guarantee the counting result is unique.


6. CASE STUDY
Figure 6 shows an ERN of Cisco router power alarms with
annotated statistics. The ERN designer regarded minor
alarms (e.g. chassisMinorAlarmPS1) and major alarms as
symptom reports of the same problem. Hence they assumed
minor alarms should temporally precede major alarms and
play the role of primary events, and major alarms are sec-
ondary events. Clearing events are also connected to alarm
events in the manner of their name implies. However, the
historical event data tell a very different story:

· None of the minor alarms has ever been observed al-
though there are significant numbers of major alarms.
A further investigate on the actual implementation
discovered that the event name chassisMinorAlarm
was actually assigned to a totally different problem
than the problem associated with chassisMajorAlarm.
Hence the event data shows there is no correlation be-
tween these two types of events at all. This fact sug-
gests two possible changes to the event management
environment. First, the event name of minor alarms
should be changed to reflect the real problem. Second,
the alarms currently called minor alarms are probably
implemented incorrectly so they couldn't be observed.

· Although there is no occurrence of minor alarms, event
chassisMinorAlarmOff has 769 instances. Clearly, this
event has no effect in the correlation rule. This may
due to the same reason in the previous point. Or, this
clearing event is also implemented incorrectly.

· The clearing event Cisco Cold Start does not have
any correlation with other events and should be re-
moved form the ERN.




Figure 6: ERN of Cisco Power Alarms



7. RELATED WORK
In the past, event management has been largely depen-
dent on model-based approaches, in which domain knowl-
edge is acquired and translated into rules used for real time
monitoring. Two broad approaches are used in general to
obtain correlation rules: the model-based approach and the
knowledge-based approach. The first is based on having a
dependency model, such as topology information to make
inferences about connectivity problems[7, 8, 9] and device
dependency and models [2, 4, 6]. If such information is avail-
able and can be maintained in a cost-effective way, there is
tremendous advantage in its exploitation. Unfortunately,
for many problems (e.g., software errors), this is not the
case. The second approach to constructing left-hand sides
acquires knowledge from domain experts such as expert sys-
tem [5] and the action oriented analysis [11]. In general, to



733

acquire models from domain experts can be a time-consuming
and expensive task. Three factors contribute to this. First,
domain experts are scarce in virtually all installations. Sec-
ond, in large installations, a group of experts is often re-
quired (since no one person has the requisite knowledge), but
it is often difficult to synthesize an answer from the opinions
of many experts. Finally, even if knowledge can be acquired,
knowledge maintenance is problematic due to the dynamics
of network systems. We note that both approaches require
experts to supply knowledge. The difference is when this
knowledge is supplied. In the first case, it is supplied during
development of the management system. In the second case,
it is supplied during installation customization.
To reducing the cost and the time of the both approaches,
our previous work [1, 10, 3] develops a data-driven, discovery-
based approach that discovers correlation rules by mining
historical event logs. Although this approach can be effec-
tive, it often results in a large amount of correlation pat-
terns. Although patterns found are statistical significant,
they may not actionable and represent problematic situa-
tions, or their correlation is due to other factor. Very often,
a large fraction of found patterns represent known correla-
tion or normal correlation. This makes it difficult to sort
out actionable, unknown patterns from many patterns.
To overcome the problems of both knowledge-based and
discovery-based approaches, this work develop a hybrid ap-
proach that combines the knowledge-based approach and the
data-driven approach. In particular, we develop algorithms
and systems that utilize existing knowledge and historical
event logs by validating and extending the correlation knowl-
edge based on historical data, and constructing knowledge
based on historical data if there is no knowledge available.
Our work is done through the integration with the event
relationship networks (ERNs).


8. CONCLUSION
Action-oriented analysis (AOA) stemmed from a very dif-
ferent view toward event management than the well studied
but less effective paradigm of root cause analysis (RCA)
and has gradually became the event management paradigm
of choice for most designers of system management environ-
ments. We have seen AOA deployed in hundreds of large-
scale production sites with great success. The success of
AOA can be ascribed to its direct attack to the needs of
proactive management and its incorporation of correlation
servers' operational model. The gist of IBM's AOA imple-
mentation is the event relationship network (ERN), graphi-
cal tool for documenting temporal correlation of events. The
quality of ERNs, correctness and completeness, has direct
impact to the effectiveness of AOA deployments. Up to date,
the designing processes of ERNs are largely depended on do-
main expertise solely. In this paper, we show event mining
techniques can provide invaluable information to ERN de-
sign.
We started from reviewing the basic definition of ERN.
Then we introduced the notion of pairwise event correla-
tion. Based on pairwise event correlation, we proposed two
semantics of ERN: weak correlation and strong correlation.
In the following sections, we discussed three scenarios that
ERN VCC system can be applied. First, the system can
verify whether an existing ERN is valid by showing the con-
fidence of each link in the ERN. Second, the system can find
all event types that show high correlation with event types
in the ERN and hence complete the ERN. Third, when there
is no existing ERN, the system can generate an initial set of
ERNs for subject matter experts to start with.
We explained the pairwise correlation counting algorithm
and why counting co-occurrence is a non-trivial issue.
This paper reports the first step of a series of research that
aims to bring data mining techniques into action-oriented
analysis. Ongoing and future research issues include event
source identification, event repertoire completion, excessively
frequent event removal, correlation server simulation, ERN
maintaining, host behavior profiling, etc. We also plan to
develop online event mining system that can automatically
response to changes of system behaviors.


9. REFERENCES
[1] Burns, L., Hellerstein, J.L., Ma, S., Perng, C. -S.,
Rabenhorst, D.A.and Tayler, D., A Systematic
Approach to Discovering Correlation Rules For Event
Management, International Symposium on Integrated
Network Management, 2001.
[2] Finkel, A., Houck, K., Calo, S., Bouloutas, A.,An
Alarm Correlation System for Heterogeneous Networks,
Network Management and Control, Vol. 2, Plennum
Press, 1994.
[3] J.L. Hellerstein and S. Ma. Mining event data for
actionable patterns. International Conference for the
resource management and performance evaluation of
enterprise computing systems, 2000.
[4] Houck, K., Calo, S., Finkel, A., Towards a Practical
Alarm Correlation System, Fourth International
Symposium on Integrated Network management, Santa
Barbara, CA, May, 1995.
[5] Jakobson, G., Weihmayer, R., Weissman, M., A
Domain-Oriented Expert System Shell for
Telecommunications Network Alarm Correlation,
Network Management and Control, Vol. 2, Plennum
Press, 1994.
[6] Kato, NeiOhta and Tomohiro KoheiIka, Proposal of
Event Correlation for Distributed Network Fault
Management and Its Evaluation, IEICE Transactions
on Communications, Vol E92-B, number 6, 1999.
[7] Kliger, S., Yemini, S., Yemini, Y., Ohlse, D, Stolfo, S.,
A Coding Approach to Event Correlation, Fourth
International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management, Santa Barbara, CA, May, 1995.
[8] Lewis, L., A Case-based Reasoning Approach to the
Resolution of Faults in Communications Networks, in
Proceedings Third International Symposium on
Integrated Network Management, North Holland, 1993.
[9] Liu, G., Mok, A.K., and E.J. Yang., Composite Events
for Network Event Correlation, International
Symposium on Integrated Network Management,
Boston, MA, May, 1999
[10] Ma, S., and Hellerstein, J.L., EventBrowser: A
Flexible Tool for Scalable Analysis of Event Data.
Distributed Operations and Management, 1999.
[11] Thoenen D., Riosa, J. And Hellerstein, J.L., Event
Relationship Networks: A Framework for Action
Oriented Analysis For Event Management,
International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management, 2001.




734

