Origami: A New Data Visualization Tool
Dr. Jen Que Louie
Tom Kraay
Nautilus Systems, Inc.
3887 Aider Woods Court
Fairfax, VA 22033-2441
(703) 385-8582
Nautilus Systems, Inc.
3887 Alder Woods Court
Fairfax, VA 22033-2441
(703) 385-8582
jqlouie@nautiIus-systems.com
ABSTRACT
Experienced analysts are remarkable at visually recognizing
unusual patterns, however, current tools have not efficiently
cateredto these abilities. Progressin information visualization
algorithms,display techniques,and usercontrols hasmadea new
generationof software tools possible. This paper will presenta
new hybrid datamining tool, Origamim, designedand developed
by Mr. Thomas Kraay. OrigamiTM can be used to identify
complex, latent relationships presentin large quantities of data.
Theserelationshipscanbeusedto interactively exploreuseful and
strategicinformation that would otherwisebeintractable.
Keywords
data cartography, data mining, data visualization, autonomous
analysis.

INTRODUCTION
Imagine that you have never beento the United Statesand that
you have never even seen a map of the US. Supposeyou ask
someoneto describe its shape and its geography.Perhapsthe
simplestandmostusell responseto your inquiry would bea map
of theUS.


In addition to the map,it might be helpful to know the distances
betweena numberof importantcities in the US. In fact, it is quite
common to have this data available in the form of a distance
matrix which is displayedalongwith the map.The distancematrix
consistsof a numberof cities which are listed acrossthe top and
downthe side.Eachentry in the matrix is the distancebetweenthe
cities that correspondto the particular row and column of the
matrix. The resulting matrix is symmetric(sincethe distancef?om
city A to city B is the sameasthe distancebetweencity B andcity
A) and the diagonal elementsare all zero. The distancebetween
two cities canbeviewed asarelationshipbetweenthetwo cities.


Now, imagine trying to picture the United Statesif all you had
was the distancematrix without the map. Obviously it is much
moredifficult to obtain an accurate"picture" of the shapeandthe
geographyof the US using only the distancematrix without the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies hear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
othcrwisc, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission andior a fee.
KDD-90
San Diego CA USA
Copyright ACM 1999 I-581 13-143-7/99/08...$5.00
accompanyingmap.


Unfortunately, in many real-world applications, the information
available correspondsmuch moreclosely to the "distancematrix"
without the moreinformative map.Also, the amountof datamay
befar morethan the small numberof cities presentin a table that
accompanies a map. Thus, developing useful information,
important insights, and answersto specific questions tim
raw
datacanbea far moredifficult problem.


Attempts to solve these types of problems have traditionally
involve using "DataMining" techniquessuchasthe useof queries
or link analysis methods.For large data setsthese methodsare
often impractical andreadily overwhelmed.What is really needed
may be describedas a "Data Cartography" schemecapable of
producing an accurateand informative "Map" of the data. This
map would be enable the user to identify latent relationships
among the data elements from which use&l information and
practical insightsmaybeextracted.


In many practical problemsthe number N of data elements(i.e.
"cities" in the aboveexample)is extremelylarge(on the order of
thousandsor tens of thousands). Relationshipsbetweenthe data
elements areexpressednumerically by the "distancematrix".


Like the distancematrix involving cities, we shall assumethat the
matrix is symmetric and the diagonal elementsare all 0. Thus,
there are Nx(N-1)/2 meaningfi.d "distances". We make no
assumptionthat the distancesare "consistent" (which they would
beif derivedfrom amap).


The problem is to map each data element into a point in the
xy-plane such that the Euclidean distancesbetweenthe points in
the planepreservesthe distancesin the matrix. Becausethere are
N dataelements,thereareN points in the plane.Eachpoint in the
plane hasan x coordinateand a y coordinate(hencethereare2N
possibilities for the coordinates).


As noted above,there are Nx(N-1)/2 distancesin the table that
mustbepreserved.SinceNx(N-1)/2 is ordersof magnitudelarger
than 2N (for large N), the result is a highly over-determined
system(i.e. a systemwith far moreconditions to be satisfiedthan
thereare.degreesof tieedom which could be usedto satisfy those
conditions).




405

In general, such over-determinedsystemsdo not have an exact
solution. That is, there is no setof N pairs of xy-coordmatesthat
preservesall of the distancesin the matrix. The standardapproach
to solve this type of problem is to construct the "best" solution
possibleusinga leastsquaresapproximation.That is,


Minimize:

N-l
N

H=C C ((xi-xj)2+ (yi-yj)' - dj)2
Pl
1=1+1

In which:
xi = the unknown x-coordinate of the i* dataelement
yi = the unknown y-coordinate of the i* dataelement
dd= the presenteddistancebetween the i* andj& data
element
Solving this problem using conventional methodsrequires O(N3)
operationsand O@?) storage. (Note: O(N3)meansthat thereare
orderN3 operationsrequiredto solve the problem.Hence,if N is
doubled, it takesabout 23= 8 times asmany operationsto solve
the problem.) For small values of N, this is acceptable,but even
supercomputersbalk when N approachesvalues of 10,000 or
mom.


The key mathematicalfeatureof the Data Cartographyschemeis
the developmentof an approximationto the leastsquaressolution
which requiresonly O(N) operations.This meansthat even very
largeproblemscanbesolvedon PCs.
This paperdemonstratesthe utility and the effectivenessof Data
Cartographyasa meansof using the datato constructa mapthat
enables the user to visualize useful information based on
relationships amongthe data elements.It also demonstratesthat
large problems can be solved on very modest (inexpensive)
computers.


Consider a data set consisting of l,SOO,OOOtelephone calls
involving slightly morethan 10,000telephonenumbers.A second
dataset includes subscriberinformation (namesand addressesof
the ownersof the telephonenumbers).A third datasetconsistsof
about 1,000 telephone numbers of individuals suspected of
engagingin criminal behavior. Thesetelephonenumbersinvolve
wire taps or PEN registers (records of calls to and from the
telephonenumberof a potential suspect).Note that datasetstwo
and three may contain telephone numbers not involved in the
l,SOO,OOOtelephonecall database.


The sourceof the data for this problem was a law enforcement
agency.This agencyhad beenusing traditional link analysis and
datamining techniquesfor severalyearswithout obtaining useful
information dueto the largequantity of dataavailable. The agency
was interested in finding a new method of analyzing and
extracting useful information from this complex set of raw data.
Early efforts using previous state-of-the-art methods required
intensive human involvement in adjusting computer suggested
arrangements,dependenceuponhaving to issuethe "right queries"
in the "right sequence",non-responsivecomputer rumimes, and
demandingstorageand memoryrequirements.Thesewerejust a
few of the challengesconfronting the agency.


Becauseof the novel demandsof this agency, the concept of
constructing a "Map" from the given data becamean intriguing
possibility. In this case, instead of "cities", we use "telephone
numbers". The "distance" between two telephone numbers is
computedusing a function whose value is inversely proportional
to their frequency of communication. If two numbers never
communicate,the distanceis not defined, and the position in the
plane correspondingto that number is determinedby the other
dataelements(telephonenumbers).




Figure 1. Initial entry into database is depicted by blue phone
number in the list (upper right) and by the blue filled circle.
The blue phone number of interest interacts with the green
phone numbers, the greens talk with the black ones, and the
black with the reds.


This idea seemedsensible, but mapping 10,000 points into the
planeseemedlike a daunting problemwhich could only be solved
using a supercomputer. However, this problem inspired the
invention of a software package called "Origami", a pending
patentheld jointly by Mr. Chuck Brisbin, former Deputy Director
of the Office of Law Enforcement,U.S. Departmentof Treasury,
Dr. Ralph Carlson, a mathematician,co-author, and founder of
MMEI Corporation, and Tom Kraay of MMEI and consultant to
Nautilus Systems,Inc.
The centerpieceof the invention is over 25 pagesof mathematics
deriving an amazingly accurateapproximation to the solution of
the least squaresapproximation, but which involves only O(N)
operations and O(N) storage. Ita implementation on a 33MHz,
8MB RAM 486 computerrequired about an hour to convert the
supplied raw data to "maps". Custom interface software was




406

written for virtually instant exploitation of the results. Telephone
numbersof interest(i.e. telephonenumbersinvolved in wire taps
andPEN registers)were depictedassolid small circles while the
remaining circles were hollow (much like major cities are
differentiatedon atypical map). The usercould mouseclick on a
circle representing any telephone number in order to obtain
subscriber information and, via automatic color alterations,
quickly discern its connectivity patterns. This eliminated the use
of drawing lines which could easily decimatethe viewability and
affordableinformation of populousmaps.




0
0


Figure 2.
Same data entry point as figure 1, showing
subscriber information . Subscription data for others can
easily be retrieved




,oo..@
eo
O 0
.' ,q.?
OO
oo~~o~8a
0
0
0
OO
0
0

Figure 3. Origami allows an observer to easily specify at least
three, non-colinear points creating a least-squares circle to
down select from the entire database all necessaryentries to
focus analysis on clusters that attract interest.


In the given dataset,six independentmapsresulted. By this we
mean that telephones depicted on any single map have no
communication with any telephone in any of the other maps.
Also, the maps sharedseveral curious traits. All six maps all
manifesteda group of tightly clusteredtelephonesnearthe center
portion (which wererichly populatedwith phonesof interest). A
largely vacant region surroundedthe center cluster. Beyond the
vacant region was a scattering of phones which were also
positioned in ring-like fashion. All of theseresults were obtained
with no humanguidance,input, or a queryof anykind.




Figure 4. Individual connectivity rays from the observation
data point.




Figure 5. Rays of all connectivity data points


The agency supplying the data had randomly shuffled court
sanctioned PEN register data collected tirn
six independent
investigations. "Telephone numbers of Interest" belonged to
known criminals and suspects. The cluster in the centerof each
mapcorrespondedto all the membersof the criminal organization.
The numbers clustered near the center involve the telephone
numbers which frequently communicate with the suspected
criminal organization. This observationled to many high quality
leadsfor agencyinvestigators.




407

The outer ring of phones belonged to persons rarely or
occasionally communicating with members of the central
organization. Many seasonedlaw enforcementpersonnel have
commentedthat what "Qrigami" autonomously unfolded on a
small computerin one hour would haverequired monthsto years
usingtraditional techniques.


The underlying mathematicaltechniquescan be applied to many
other novel schemesthat can be applied to solving various other
problems,such as: Mailing Data, Single PEN registerresults, IP
Address Activity on Sniffers, Free Text, Bioinformatics, Credit
CardTransactions,and ComputerForensics

About the Authors
Dr. JenQ. ("Ed") Lottie is Presidentof Nautilus Systems.He is a
consultant for several commercial companies and is active in
artificial intelligence, large databasesystems,datawarehousing,
data mining and competitive intelligence conferences and
committees.He has designedand implemented medical system
diagnostic and analysis programs; knowledge and rules based
businesssystems;workflow systems;image storageand retrieval
systems;and emergencyinformation systems. He has designed
and developed systemssupporting the military and intelligence
communities. Dr. Louie holds M. S. and Ph.D. degrees in
Biomedical Engineering tirn CaseInstitute of Technology and a
M. D. from WesternReserveUniversity.


Dr. JenQueLouie
Nautilus Systems,Inc.
3867Alder WoodsCourt
Fairfax, VA 22033-2441
(703) 385-8582Voice
(703) 385-0965FAX
jqlouie@nautilus-systemscorn.
Mr. Kraay, the developerof origami, received a B.S. degreein
Mathematicsfrom the United StatesAir Force Academy and an
M.S.
degree in
Mathematics from the University
of
Massachusetts.Mr. Kraay has over 25 years experience in
computer science, parallel
algorithm
development and
implementation, signal processing image processing, system
engineering, astrophysics, data base analysis and retrieval
methods, and law enforcement related technical investigative
techniques. His experience covers a broad range of scientific,
intelligence, and law enforcementapplications and management.
Mr. Kmay's national reputation in parallel processinghas earned
him severalinvitations as a keynote speaker.He also acts in an
advisory capacity at the highest levels for two major parallel
computervendorsregardingpathsof future products.Becauseof
his achievements in law enforcement in the area of money
laundering,he hasbeeninvited to deliver presentationsat theU.S.
National Institute of Economic Crime. He hasalso addressedthe
National Homicide Investigators Association on Investigative
methodsrelevantto serial murdercases.


Mr. ThomasKraay
MMEI Corporation
c/oNautilus Systems,Inc.
3867Alder WoodsCourt
Fairfax, VA 22033-2441
(703) 385-8582Voice
(703) 385-0965FAX


Origami *
is atrademarkof MMEI.


Authors Special Note:
The datausedto generatethe figures for this paperwere not real
individuals, addresses,or phonenumbers




408

