Optimization
of Collection Efforts in Automobile
Financing
-A KDD supported Environment
H. Kauderer, G. Nakhaeizadeh
DaimlerChrysler
AG
Research and Technology
P.O. Box 23 60, D-89013 Ulm, Germany
harald.kauderer@daimlerchtysler.com
rheza.nakhaeizadeh@daimlerchtysler.com

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a project realized in the domain of risk
managementat afinancial servicessubsidiaryof DaimlerChrysler.
The project resultedin the implementationof an innovative KDD
approachdesignedto optimize the collection efforts in automobile
financing. In contrast with the conventional "credit scoring" -
which is mainly gearedtowards assessinga customer's credit
worthiness at the time when she/heapplies for a loan - in this
project we followed the credit life cycle downstreamand focused
on how to bestdeal with delinquent customersin an actual credit
portfolio. The resulting DataMining solution wasimplementedin
the finance company's systems environment and in daily
operations.
Keywords
Scoring, collections, credit risk, vehicle financing, automobile
lending

1. INTRODUCTION
In traditional automotive lending "collections" generally refersto
all the processes,tools and activities carried out to deal with
delinquent customers.Strategiesto "collect the money" usually
extend from sending a letter, making phone calls to repossessing
vehicles or any (sequential)combination thereof. The selectionof
the "right" strategy or treatment though is a function of the
individual riskinessof eachcustomerat aparticular point in time.
In this project the businessobjective was to optimize the risk-
adjustedallocation of delinquent customers/accountsto different
collections treatments and levels of collector experience in a
phone collections department.The departmentis divided into 3
collection groupsfor different risk levels (low, medium,high risk)
andis staffedaccordingly with collectors with different skills and
experience(i.e. part time employees/ full time employees/ full
time specialists). The most critical step in solving this business
problem is assessingthe individual riskiness of each newly or
previously delinquent customereveryday.


pe-mission
to n&e
digital
or hard copies ol'ali
or part of this work fix
persona, or c~assroon~llSe is granted without fee provided that CoPiCs
arc not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies heAl this notice ~II(I the full citation OII the first page. To COPY
ot,ler\vise, to republish, to
post
on servers or to redisu-ihute to lists-
rcquircs prior specific permission and/or a fw.
KDD-99
San Diego CA USA
Copyright ACM 1999 I-581 13-143-7/99/08...$5.00
F. At-tiles, H. Jeromin
Services by DaimlerChrysler
(debis) AG
Financial Services
Eichhornstr. 3, D-10875 Berlin, Germany
fedor-at-tiles @mbcc.com
holger.jeromin@?finance.debis.com

A simpleapproachto the problem is to assigneachcustomerto a
different collection group basedon his/her current stateof "days
delinquent" or "dayspastdue" (DPD):
If
0 < DPD <= 30 thenLevel 1 collections (low risk)
elseif 30 < DPD <= 60 thenLevelIcollections
(mediumrisk)
else
60< DPD
thenLevel-3-collections (high risk)
The implicit assumptionis that a customer'spaymentability and
behavior is perfectly correlated with his/her current state of
delinquency. Pastexperienceshows that this approachmay be a
sub-optimalsolution.
The basic idea of the advancedapproachwas to use historical
customer information, which is accessible and periodically
updated, to develop a predictive decisioning system for the
allocation of collection resources.Including recent information
about a customer'spast paymentbehavior is especially valuable
for this purpose.
We assumedthat moredetailed andrich information on customer
behavior would allow an earlier and more accuratedetermination
of expectedrisksthan only the DPD variable.

2. DATA
The sourceof the data we used for this project was the billing
systemof the finance companywhich holds customerinformation
about the contract (amount financed, monthly payment, term,
etc.), about the vehicle (make,type, model, etc.) and about the
currentandpastseverityof delinquenciesandpaymentbehavior.

3. PREPROCESSING
AND MODELING
3.1 Definition
of the target variable
In the first phase of model development we viewed the
optimization of collections as a classification problem. Since the
classesarenot representedin the data,we had to derive a target
variable by observing the "days-delinquent"-variable of a
delinquent customer over the current and following 3 billing
cycles(by moving thetime window on historical data).
Figure 1 illustrates the basic methodology used to derive the
discretevalues of the class variable from the "days delinquent"
variable in consecutivemonths. From a credit risk management
standpoint there aretwo "magic" thresholds: The 30 and the 60
daysdelinquency line. The classvariable aggregatesthe values of
days delinquent in the following three months into one of three
classvalues:




414

Level 1: Today's delinquent customerhas to stay under the 30
daysdelinquency threshold in all of the following threemonths.
Level 2: else.
Level 3: ,Today's delinquent customer violates the 60 days
delinquency threshold at least in one of the following three
months.




-?3

Figure 1
Our first results applying C5.0 to learn a classification model
delivered promising accuracyrates but also huge trees and rule
sets,which were not suitable for a manual implementationin the
software environment. Therefore, we researched alternative
approachesthat would not have this shortcoming. Our past
experiences using M6.1 in other domains had shown less
complexity in the resulting models. It is well known, however,
that M6.1 and other regression tree approaches require a
continuous-valuetargetvariable. Sowe hadto gothrough the pre-
processingphaseagainanddefine numericaltargetvariables.
Similar to the derivation of the classvariable shown in figure 1,
the continuous-value target variables were derived from the
delinquency over the three following months, too. The applied
methodis illustrated in figure 2.




Figure 2
Line A showsa linear transformationfrom daysdelinquent into a
risk equivalent interval [O;l] for one particular month, Line B
shows a non-linear transformation. Using a non-linear
transformation takes into account that (from a credit risk
managementstandpoint) moving from 2 to 5 days delinquent is
not asbadasmoving from 43 to 46 daysdelinquent. Aggregation
and weighting of the three following months led to the final
continuous-valuetargetvariables.

3.2 Final Data Access and Preparation
For model developmentand evaluation we accessed12 datasets
of consecutive,monthly periods, each a snapshotof the current
portfolio(non-delinquent accountsincluded). For eachmonth the
delinquent accountswere matchedwith their performanceover
the next threemonths.

3.3 Modeling and Evaluation
Using C5.0 [l] asa benchmark,we evaluatedthe performanceof
three alternative modeling techniques: Linear regression,
regressiontree M6.1 [2] and neural networks. Furthermore,we
used three different continuous-value target variables basedon
linear andnon-linear transformations(seefigure 2).
We ended up training a few hundred models with varying
parametersettingsduring the whole model developmentprocess.
In order to transform the continuous-value model outputs back
into discreteclasses,we had to setcutoffs in a way that madethe
resultscomparableto the resultsof 0.0. The 3 tablesbelow show
the predictive power (accuracyrates)of eachmodeling technique
for eachrisk level (1, 2 and 3) as testedon unseendata Num
TargetI, II andIII designatethe alternativeapproacheswe usedto
constructthe continuous-valuetargetvariables.
Trivial:
88.7%




Trivial:
55.6%




Table 3
Summarizing the results we can say that the regression tree
outperformsother solutions in Level-2 and Level-3, C5.0 shows
the best accuracy in Level 1. Neural networks did not reach
satisfactoryresults.Whenu&g the trivial classification (DPD) as
a benchmark,we sawthat the new modelsoutperformedit in the
high-risk classes(Level-2 andLevel-3).
The results achieved were very sensitive to the type of
continuous-value target variable used, a phenomenonworthy of
further detailedanalysisin the future.




415

4. WORKFLOW
INTEGRATION
Basedon the encouraging results of the evaluation process,the
regressiontreemodel wasimplementedinto the phonecollections
workflow of the finance company. In addition to the good
performance,the lower overall-complexity of this model type
(compacttree with underlying linear regressionmodels) met the
constraintsimposedby the needfor manual programmingduring
implementationin the collections softwareenvironment.

The implementation of the predictive model wasprecededby the
implementation of a decision engine software.This softwarewas
"inserted" betweenthe billing systemand the collections system
to generatearisk scorefor every delinquent accountthat is passed
from the billing systeminto the collections system.

Added functionality of this system gave us the ability to run
competing collection strategies against each other on random
samplesof delinquent accounts.This methodology of controlled
testing is generally known as champion-challengertesting in the
finance industry.
A part of the delinquent portfolio is still managedusing the trivial
allocation strategyin order to allow a continuous monitoring of
the decision model's performance via such a champion -
challenger comparisons. The experience after 12 months in
operation shows a stableperformanceof the model and enough
robustnessto allow for score cut-off adjustments to address
fluctuating workload andcapacityconstraints.

5. REFERENCES
[I]
Quinlan, J.R., C4.5: Programsfor Machine Learning, San
Mateo,California: Morgan Kaufmamr,1993.
[2] Quinlan, J.R., Learning with continuous classes. In:
ProceedingsAI `92, Singapore:World Scientific, 1992.




416

