Tumor Cell Identification using Features Rules
Bin Fang1,2
Wynne Hsu1,2
Mong Li Lee1
1
Singapore ­ MIT Alliance
National University of Singapore
2
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore 117543

{smafangb,whsu, leeml}@comp.nus.edu.sg


ABSTRACT
Advances in imaging techniques have led to large repositories of
images. There is an increasing demand for automated systems that
can analyze complex medical images and extract meaningful
information for mining patterns. Here, we describe a real-life
image mining application to the problem of tumour cell counting.
The quantitative analysis of tumour cells is fundamental to
characterizing the activity of tumour cells. Existing approaches
are mostly manual, time-consuming and subjective. Efforts to
automate the process of cell counting have largely focused on
using image processing techniques only. Our studies indicate that
image processing alone is unable to give accurate results. In this
paper, we examine the use of extracted features rules to aid in the
process of tumor cell counting. We propose a robust local
adaptive thresholding and dynamic water immersion algorithms to
segment regions of interesting from background. Meaningful
features are then extracted from the segmented regions. A number
of base classifiers are built to generate features rules to help
identify the tumor cell. Two voting strategies are implemented to
combine the base classifiers into a meta-classifier. Experiment
results indicate that this process of using extracted features rules
to help identify tumor cell leads to better accuracy than pure
image processing techniques alone.

Keywords
identification, features rules, local adaptive thresholding, dynamic
water immersion, meta classifier, majority vote, weighted vote


1. INTRODUCTION
The mechanism of tumor cell metastasis has been the subject of
research for many years in pathology. Tumor cells first migrate
from the primary tumor, penetrate into the circulation, and
eventually colonize distant sites.
Knowledge regarding the
dissemination of tumor cells has been considered very important
in clinical studies of pathology.
The quantitative analysis of
tumor cells in the filed of pathology forms the fundamental
element to characterize the dissemination activity of tumor cells.
In traditional pathology, tumor cells are first stained. Then, they
are being introduced into experimental animals such as mice.


Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGKDD '02, July 23-26, 2002, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113-567-X/02/0007...$5.00.
After a few days, tissue specimens containing the stained tumor
cells are prepared. A highly trained medical professional will then
analyze the tumor cell metastasis by manually counting the
number of stained tumor cells in the specimen. This process is
very time-consuming and not objective. Figure 1 shows some
examples of typical images of tissue specimens with the stained
tumor cells.




Figure 1. Small portions of a tissue -section histological image

Many of these images exhibit poor contrast with non-uniform
background illumination. In particular, the tumor cell boundaries
are not sufficiently sharp to be readily extracted and many tumor
cells, in fact, overlap with each other to form cell groups. The
following observations have been made with regard to the
problem of tumor cells identification:
1)
High intensity pixels in the form of white patches scattering
in the image may have a number of interpretations: they
could be the true tumor cells (see Figure 2a), or they could be
clumped cell groups where the tumor cells have grown to
form a colony (Figure 2b), or they could be histologial noise
such as reflection of light on the spherical surface of normal
cells (Figure 2c), or they could be psedopods of tumor cells
(Figure 2b).
2)
The non-uniform background illumination may result in the
intensity of the tumor cells being darker than the background
intensity at another portion of the image (see Figure 2d).
3) The presence of cell fragments (see Figure 2b) complicates
the problem further as their cell boundaries are typically not
sharp enough to be readily extracted. In addition, there are
many situations where the cells are touching one another that
resulted in highly irregular shape (Figure 2b).

There have been a number of attempts to automate the process of
tumor cell counting [1-10]. Many of these attempts focus on using
pure image processing techniques to identify the tumor cells.
However, due to the highly complex nature of the tumor cells
images as described above, these approaches have limited success.




495

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Figure 2. a) Individual tumor cells, b) clumped tumor cell
groups, fragments and pseudopods of tumor cells,
c) histological noise, d) `brighter' background.

In this paper, we propose a robust local adaptive thresholding and
dynamic water immersion algorithms to segment regions of
interest from the background. These regions of interest may
correspond to true tumor cells or histological noise such as white
light reflection regions and the extended psuedopods of tumor
cells. Based on the segmented regions of interests, meaningful
features are extracted. Three base classifiers are then built to
generate features rules that will differentiate the tumor cells from
the histological noise. Further, it is observed that the three
different
classifiers
may
potentially
offer
complementary
information about the patterns to be classified. This could be
integrated to improve the overall performance of the identification
system. Two integration strategies, namely majority vote and
weighted vote, have been applied to unify the three base
classifiers into a meta classifier. Experimental results indicate that
this process of using extracted features rules to help identify
tumor cells leads to better accuracy than pure image processing
techniques alone, and meta-classifier with weighted vote has the
best predictive accuracy.

2. RELATED WORK
The design of an automatic system for medical image analysis in
pathology has been the main research objective for many years.
There have been many cell segmentation and identification
methods that employ image processing techniques to count the
number of tumor cells in digitized histological images. They are
categorized into statistical classification methods [6,7,9], region
growing methods [3,4], and boundary methods [5,8,10].

Awasthi et al. [3] used a combination of multiple thresholding,
dilation morphology operation and region growing methods to
perform cell segmentation. Berns et al. [4] used a combination of
median filter, local histogram, and morphology filter with
watershed method to achieve the same goal of cell segmentation.
Gauthier et al. [5] used global thresholding, component labeling,
morphology filter. Jeacocke et al. [6] used a multi-resolution
method which contains quadtree smoothing, lowest level
classification and boundary re-estimation by water immersion.
Chen et al. [7] used spatial adaptive filter, watershed and refining
of the labeled image. Anoraganingrum [8] used median filter and
mathematical morphology operation for edge detection based cell
segmentation. Kovalev et al. [9] used pattern recognition based on
intensity of G image plane and the balance between G and B
intensity for color images. Wu et al. [10] used cost function based
optimal method to obtain a parametric reconstructed image which
approximates the original image and threshold such image to
segment cells from background.
Although these methods can be simply implemented and have
satisfactory experiment results with relatively simple medical
images, they work poorly on complex images. No further
processing was suggested to improve the ability of automatic cell
segmentation. This is the reason that we propose a robust image
processing technique to cope with complex histological images
and some data mining techniques to help improve system
performance.

Recently, research in data mining and knowledge discovery is
rapidly gaining popularity in the field of medical image
classification. Some of the research and applications carried out
use various data mining classification techniques for image
categorization. Antonie et al. [11] investigated the use of neural
network and association rule mining for classifying digital
mammongrams into two categories: normal and abnormal images.
Hsu et al. [12] combined 12 image attributes extracted for each
individual vessel segment and fed them into an association based
data mining classification tool, CBA to classify the input vessel
segments as normal or abnormal in the application of an
Integrated Retinal Information system. However, as far as we
know, there has been no application of data mining techniques to
the problem of tumor cell identification.

3. OVERVIEW OF OUR APPROACH
First, we apply a robust local adaptive thresholding to segment
white patches with histological meaning from non-uniform
illumination background. Second, we use a dynamic water
immersion approach to detach touching cells in clumped cell
groups and extract the regions of interesting for further
investigation.
For each segmented regions, we extract three
relevant features of size and shape that accurately describes the
characteristics of the region. Next, data mining techniques are
applied on the extracted features to derive a number of base
classifiers, namely C4.5 classifier [13], Bayes classifier [14], and
CBA classifier [15]. Finally, to improve the accuracy of the tumor
cell detection problem, a meta classifier with two voting strategies
of majority vote and weighted vote is built upon the three base
classifiers.

4. FEATURE EXTRACTION FOR MINING
The most crucial step in this tumor cell identification system lies
in the accurate segmentation of the regions of interest.
Segmentation refers to the process of extracting meaningful
regions out from the image background. Such regions typically
correspond to objects of interest or their parts. The segmentation
of tissue-section histological images into regions that correspond
to meaningful biological structures, such as cells and clumped cell
groups, is a difficult problem as described in Section 1. In this
section, we study the use of adaptive local thresholding method
and dynamic water immersion algorithm to perform the
segmentation.

Traditionally, segmentation techniques are categorized into two
classes: those that employed region-finding algorithms versus
those that employed contour-detection algorithms. Most classical
region-finding algorithms involve partitioning the grey level
histogram in such a way that the appropriate thresholds for
segmentation can be easily determined. However, studies indicate
that for complex images such as the histological images, simple
thresholding techniques based on a globally determined value will




496

not work well. One way to overcome this problem is to adopt a
global adaptive thresholding method based on the analysis of
pixel intensity distribution. According to the mean and variance of
histogram, since we want to segment white patches from the
background, the threshold can be set as follows,

stdmeanTH
×+=

(1)

where TH is the adaptive threshold, mean and std represents the
mean and standard deviation of the gray level distribution of all
pixels respectively.  is a constant.

Global adaptive thresholding method can effectively segment
white patches with histological meaning from background.
However, when the images have non-uniform background where
white patches at one location in the image can be `darker' than the
background at other locations, then global adaptive thresholding
technique is unable to effectively extract all the white patches that
are scattering over the image.




(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. Segmentation results by a) a global low threshold, b)
a global high threshold, c) a local adaptive thresholding.

Figure 3a and 3b shows the results of applying the global adaptive
thresholding method with a low and a high threshold respectively.
Clearly, a relatively low global threshold will lead to a large
number of unexpected histological noise as shown in Figure 3a.
To prevent extracting the unexpected histological noise, a
relatively high threshold is preferred. However, this may lead to
some histological meaning patches being excluded because they
are even `darker' than many background patches somewhere else
not displayed in Figure 3b. To deal with this problem, we propose
the use of a local adaptive thresholding method. The main idea is
to apply the global thresholding method to one small area at a
time. First, the image is divided into N×N sub-images of equal
size. Then, the histogram of each sub-image is computed and the
local threshold is determined based on the intensity distribution of
pixels in the sub-image. Figure 3c shows the result of applying
adaptive local thresholding method.

Having obtained the segmented image, our next task is to separate
the clumped cell groups into individual cells so that meaningful
features for each cell can be extracted for mining purposes. This
problem is made complicated by the fact that the boundaries of
the cells are fuzzy and cannot be readily extracted. Furthermore,
the shapes of cells are varied due to the presence of cell
fragments. Edge detection techniques such as Laplace of Gaussian
(LoG) method perform poorly as it tends to lead to broken and
disjoined edges which require additional efforts to analyze the
output of an edge detection image before boundaries information
can be extracted.

Watershed or water immersion algorithm is considered to be a
powerful technique for object contour detection. Water immersion
algorithm works by grouping pixels with similar gradient
information. Direct application of water immersion method to the
digitized
histological
images
typically
produces
over-
segmentation of the individual cells. Instead, we propose a
dynamic water immersion algorithm to cope with the situation.
Details of the algorithm follow.

First, a N×N window is used to locate the local maxima points in
the image. For each segmented white patches, we place the center
of the window over each pixel in the white patches. If the
intensity of the center pixel is the highest with respect to all the
other pixels in the window, we say that the center pixel is a local
maxima; otherwise, the window will move to be centered at
another pixel to continue the search for all local maxima points.
At the end of this phase, all the maxima are marked and they will
be treated as the starting seeds for water immersion method. One
advantage of using the sliding window approach is that with the
appropriate window size, it is possible to eliminate a large amount
of maxima points that correspond to the light reflection regions
thus removing false detection. This is because the intensity level
of the maxima points corresponding to the light reflection patches
are generally lower than that of potential tumor cells or even the
extended pseudo-pods of cells. Given that the distances between
the maxima points of the light reflection patches and the nearest
maxima points of the neighboring tumor cells are generally less
than that between two touching tumor cells, it is possible to set the
window size in such a way that these false maxima points are
`absorbed' by the neighboring tumor cell maxima points while the
true maxima points corresponding to the touching cells are not
affected. Figure 4a shows the effect of choosing a suitable
window size on the detection of the true maxima points.




(a)
(b)
Figure 4. a) Local maxima marked by dark dots, b) regions of
interesting extracted marked by continuous white line.

Having identified the true maxima points, water immersion
process starts from the detected maxima points and progressively
floods its neighboring pixels. The neighboring pixels are defined
to be the 8-direction neighbors. These neighbors are placed in a
growing queue structure sorted in descending order of the
intensity level of the pixels. The lowest intensity pixel in the
growing queue will be `immersed' first and it is marked as
belonging to the same region label as the current seed. The
marked pixel is then removed from the growing queue. All
neighboring pixels whose intensity level is lower than the marked
pixel are added to the growing queue. This progressive immersion
process continues until the growing queue is empty.

Unfortunately, simple application of the water immersion
technique have the tendency of over-flooding that leads to
incorrect shape and size of the potential tumor cells. This can
seriously undermine the accuracy of the classifiers in the next
step. To overcome this tendency of over-flooding, we apply an
additional stopping criterion. In addition to ignoring all




497

neighboring pixels with intensity level lower than the last placed
pixel, we also ignore all those pixels whose intensity level is too
low as compared to the last placed pixel. To implement this, we
use a dynamically set seed-to-pixel contrast threshold. This
threshold is larger for the `brighter' seed and smaller for the
`darker' seed. This is because from a priori knowledge, we know
that the variation in intensity level of pixels neighboring to a
`brighter' maxima point is larger than that to a `darker' maxima
point. The seed-to-pixel contrast threshold is determined using the
equation as follows:

255
max
max


255
_
I
e
I
AthCon
××=
(2)

where Con_th is the seed-to-pixel contrast threshold, A is a
constant determined by analyzing the intensity level variation of
the tumor cells , and Imax is intensity level of the seed.
Figure 4b shows that the proposed algorithm is able to effectively
extracted accurate contours of the potential tumor cells, and is
able to separate those touching tumor cells. At the same time, a
large number light reflection region has been eliminated.
However, the algorithm is still unable to eliminate false regions
corresponding to the extended psuedopods of cell segments. In
order to obtain an accurate count of tumor cells in the histological
images, it is necessary to adopt a different strategy. In the next
section, we discuss how data mining techniques can be used to
help classify these regions of interest into either tumor cells or
non-tumor cells.


5. MINING THE TUMOR CELL FEATURES
At this point in the analysis process of histological images, we
have segmented the original image into individual regions of
interest with different sizes and shapes. For each segmented
region, we need to extract relevant information for meaning
mining to take place. Although touching cells together with cell
fragments make cells in highly irregular shapes, because the
process of dynamic water immersion method to extract individual
regions of interesting does not follow the irregular shapes of cells
but extract potential tumor cell regions with rounder and larger
appearance than extracted noise regions such as extended
psuedopods, we focused on features related to the size and the
shape of each region.

Shape measurements are physical dimensional measures that
characterize the appearance of an object. The goal is to use the
least number of measurements to characterize an object
adequately so that it may be unambiguously classified. Human
judgements of shape complexity depend on several factors. Of
course, topological factors play an important role, the number of
components and holes in the object affect its judged complexity.
In our tumor cell identification problem, we assume that the
regions are made up of connected set of pixels with no holes
inside.
In
order
to
guarantee
this
property,
a
closing
morphological operation has been used to fill all the holes that
may possibly exist in the regions of interest. This ensures that
each region of interest has a single border. For such region, the
size and shape attributes are area of the region, the roundness and
the elongation of the region.

The first feature we have found useful relate to the size of the
region in the form of the area of the region. Area of the region of
interest is defined as the total number of pixels within the region,
up to and including the boundary pixels. Another useful feature is
the perimeter of the region. It is defined as the arc length of the
digital boundary of the region under consideration. The arc length
is obtained from its chain code representation [16] with 8-
direction connection whereby the horizontal and vertical moves
are counted as 1 and the diagonal moves are counted as
2 . With
this definition, we define the roundness of a region as:


2
4
Perimeter
Area
roundness
××
=

(3)

Note that the roundness measurement is a value between 0 and 1.
The greater the ratio is, the rounder is the object. If the ratio is
equal to 1, the object is a perfect circle. As the ratio decreases
from 1, the object becomes elongated or irregular. In the real
plane, the `isoperimetric inequality' rule holds that roundness = 1
for any shape. However, in a digital measurement, it turns out that
the roundness may be greater than 1 for small area regions.

Another important feature to characterize morphology of a region
is the elongation measure. The elongation of a region is defined as
the ratio of the width of the minor axis to the length of the major
axis. This ratio is computed as the minor axis width distance
divided by the major axis length distance, giving a value between
0 and 1. If the ratio is equal to 1, the region is roughly a square or
is circularly shaped. As the ratio decreases from 1, the region
becomes more elongated. Major axis is the longest line that can be
drawn through the region. The two end points of the major axis
are found by selecting the pairs of boundary pixels with the
maximum distance between them. This maximum distance is also
known as the major axis length. Major axis angle is the angle
between the major axis and the x-axis of the image. The angle can
range from 0° to 360°. Similarly, we define the minor axis length
and minor axis angle where the minor axis must maintain
perpendicularity with respect to the major axis at all time. The
result is a measure of the degree of elongation, Elong


MINOR
MAJOR
L
L
Elong =
(4)

where LMAJOR is the major axis length of the region and LMINOR is
the minor axis length of the region.

With the extracted features of each regions of interest, a number
of base classifiers are built to help classify these regions into
either tumour cells or non-tumour cells. We have selected the
three most commonly used data mining techniques to build our
team of base classifiers. The first base classifier is the statistical
Bayes classifier [14] which incorporates the full covariance
matrix. The size and shape features of the regions of interest are
not necessarily independent of each other and maintaining the
correlation information among them may help to improve the final
classification performance. In the training phase, the mean vector
and the covariance matrix are computed from the training data to
model the Bayes classifier. When a test data comes in, it is
assigned to the class with the highest posterior probability. Our
second base classifier is based on the decision tree techniques. We
use the most widely cited decision tree classification tool, C4.5
[13], to build this base classifier. Our third and final base
classifier is based on association rules mining technique. This
classifier is built using the Classification-Based on Association
(CBA) tool that was first proposed in 1998 [15].

While the individual classifiers do give reasonably accurate
predictions of tumor versus non-tumor cells, to improve the
predictive accuracy further, we propose the use of two voting




498

strategies to integrate the base classifiers into a meta-classifier.
The first voting strategy is the majority vote strategy. In the
majority vote strategy, the meta classifier will output the majority
class among all the base classifiers as the final class. For example,
in our problem, we have two classes: tumor versus non-tumor.
Once test data comes in, if the Bayes classifier identifies it as
class tumor, but both the C4.5 and CBA classifiers classify it as
class non-tumor, then the majority-vote meta-classifier will assign
the test data to class non-tumor. This technique is simple but it
does not take full advantage of the strengths of the different
classifiers.

It is observed that different classifiers have different abilities in
classifying the different classes. For example, the Bayes classifier
may be very accurate in identifying the tumor class, whereas the
CBA classifier may be very good in identifying the non-tumor
class. To take full advantage of their different strengths, a
weighted vote strategy for building the meta classifier is proposed.
In this strategy, different weights are assigned to the individual
classifier's outputs for different classes. Assume the weight of the
Bayes classifier when it results in class tumor is 1, and when it
results in class non-tumor is 2. Similarly, the weight of the C4.5
classifier when it results in class tumor is 3, and for non-tumor
class, the weight is 4. Finally, the weight of the CBA classifier
when it results class tumor is 5, and for the non-tumor class, the
weight is 6. All these weights are in the range from 0.0 to 1.0.
When a test data comes in, if the Bayes classifier identifies it as
belong to class tumor, the score of this test data for class tumor is
1, and at the same time, the score of the test data for class non-
tumor is 1-1. If the Bayes classifier identifies it as belong to class
non-tumor, then the score of the test data for class tumor is 1-2,
while the score for class non-tumor is 2. In the same manner, we
are able to obtain the scores for class tumor and non-tumor from
the other two base classifiers. At the meta classifier level, the total
scores for the two classes are computed. If the total score for class
tumor is greater than the total score for class non-tumor, the
metal-classifier will classify the particular test data to be class
tumor.

6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The images used in our experiments are derived from the
histological sections containing tumor cells of experimental
animals' lungs which had been stained using GFP - green
fluorescent protein. Female mice, 4­8 weeks of age, were given
injections with a single cell suspension of 2 x 106 cells in 100 µl
into the tail vein. After 24 or 48 h, the mice were sacrificed and
the lungs were frozen in Histo Prep. Ten-micrometer frozen
sections were made. The slides were scanned using a digital
micrometer (Microcode II; Boeckeler Instruments, Tucson, AZ) to
ensure that all areas were counted only once. Green fluorescent
cells were confirmed by overlay with a DAPI-stained nucleus. The
tissue sections were observed by a Leica inverted fluorescent
microscope. A Hamamatsu Orca digital camera was connected to
the microscope and linked to a Mac G4. A ×4 objective was used
during acquisition.
Histological images were captured directly
using the digital camera as 8-bit gray-level 1024×1022 TIFF files
and stored on hard disk of Mac G4 computer. The histological
images were characterized by high intensity pixels in the form of
white patches corresponding to potential tumor cells expressing
GFP. The proposed methods were evaluated on a database of 20
tissue-section
histological
images
captured
under
same
environment such as subjective magnification, exposure and data
format, etc. The resolution of these images is 1024×1022 in 8-bit
grey level TIFF format.

During the local adaptive thresholding stage, the images are
divided into 3×3 sub-images. After performing some initia l
studies, we set  in Eqn (1) to 2.35. This value is good enough to
retain as many white patches as possible while removing most of
the background noise. For the dynamic water immersion
algorithm, a window size of 7x7 pixels is used to locate the local
maxima.
The Con_A in Eqn (2) was determined by initial
investigation to be 42 for extracting contours of regions of
interesting. Figure 4 show an example of the segmented white
patches and local maxima marked by dark dots. Contours of
regions of interesting extracted by using the dynamic water
immersion algorithm are highlighted by continuous white lines.

In our experiments, there are 2850 regions of interest in total. A
medical professional had labeled 1704 regions to be tumor cells.
This implies that using the proposed image processing technique
alone, we are only able to achieve an accuracy of 59.9%, which is
far from satisfactory. Next, we perform experiments on the
predictive accuracy of the three base classifiers. Here, we use the
10 fold cross-validation testing strategy. The results obtained for
10 splits of the database are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Error rates for the 10 splits with the three base
classifiers.

Bayes
C4.5
CBA

Split
Error
rate (%)
Error
rate (%)
Error
rate (%)
1
15.8
15.1
17.5
2
17.5
15.1
15.4
3
23.2
20.4
18.2
4
21.1
20.0
17.9
5
22.1
20.7
20.7
6
14.7
16.8
18.9
7
17.9
17.9
15.8
8
26.0
24.6
21.1
9
30.8
23.2
20.7
10
25.3
26.0
22.1
Average (%)
21.4
20.0
18.8


On average, the CBA classifier has the lowest average error rate
of 18.8%. We also noticed that the classification error rates of the
CBA classifier for 10 splits of database are more compact and
consistent than that of Bayes and C4.5 classifiers.
Table 2
summarizes the results of the experiments for evaluating the
performance of meta-classifiers using the two voting strategies. In
the table, false-positive error rate refers to the misclassification of
tumour cell as non-tumour cell while false negative error rate
relates to misclassification of non-tumour cell as tumour cell.
Here, the average error rate for the majority-vote meta-classifier is
19.0%. On the other hand, the weighted-vote meta-classifier has
the lowest average error rate among all the individual base
classifiers with an average error rate of 18.7%. This result is
achieved at 1 = 0.9, 2 = 0.6, 3 = 0.7, 4 = 0.6, 5 = 0.6, 6 =
0.9. The Bayes classifier has a stronger ability to identify tumor
cells, hence it receives greater weight for classifying class tumor
cell. Statistical significance evaluations of paired t-tests between
the weighted-vote meta-classifier and individual base classifiers




499

have also been conducted. It was found that the improvement of
the meta-classifier over Bayes classifier is significant at 78%
confidence level. However the improvement over the CBA
classifier is not really statistically significant.

Table 2. Comparison of classification performances of three
base classifiers and the meta-classifiers using both majority
and weight voting combination strategies.


Classification
method
False-
positive
error
rate (%)
False-
negative
error
rate (%)
Average
error rate
(%)

Bayes classifier
6.6
43.5
21.4
C4.5 classifier
12.0
31.8
20.0
CBA classifier
14.1
25.8
18.8
Meta-classifier
(Majority Voting)
10.4
31.7
19.0

Meta-classifier
(Weight Voting)
14.1
24.8
18.7



7. CONCLUSION
There is an increasing demand for automated systems that can
analyze complex medical images and extract meaningful
information for mining patterns. The quantitative analysis of
tumour cells is fundamental to characterizing the activity of
tumour cells. In this paper, we describe a real-life image mining
application to the problem of tumour cell counting. We propose a
robust local adaptive thresholding and dynamic water immersion
algorithms to segment regions of interesting from background.
Our studies indicate that image processing alone is unable to give
accurate results. Therefore, meaningful features are extracted
from the segmented regions and the use of extracted features rules
is examined by building a number of base classifiers to help
identify the tumor cell. Two voting strategies are also
implemented to combine the base classifier into a meta-classifier
to improve identification accuracy. Experiment results indicate
that this process of using extracted features rules to help identify
tumor cell leads to better accuracy than pure image processing
techniques alone. Meta-classifier with weight voting has the
lowest average error rate among all the classifiers.

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Dr Christopher Wong of Functional
Genomics Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
for providing us the histological images and valuable explanations
of medical background related.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Lam, C.Y. Suen, `Application of majority voting to
pattern recognition : an analysis of its behavior and
performance,' IEEE Trans.Systems Man Cybern.Part A, Vol.
27 (5), pp. 553 ­568, 1997.
[2] J. Kittler, M. Hatef, R. Duin, J. Matas, `On combining
classifiers,' IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., Vol. 20
(3), pp. 226 ­239, 1998.
[3] Awasthi, K. Vikas, W. Doolitle, G. Parulkar, J.G. MC Nally,
`Cell tracking using a distributed algorithm for 3d image
segmentation,' Bioimaging, vol. 1, pp. 98-112, 1994.
[4] G. S. Berns, M.W. Berns, `Computer-based tracking of living
cells,' Experimental Cell Research, Vol. 142, pp. 103-109,
November 1982.
[5] D. Gauthier, M.D. Levine, P.B. Noble, `Principles of object
detection for an automated cell tracking system,' Image
Analysis in Biology, CH. 2, pp.9-28, CRC press, Florida,
1991.
[6] M.B. Jeacocke, B.C. Lovell, `A multi-resolution algorithm
for cytological image segmentation,' Proc. 2nd Australian
and New Zealand Conf. on Intelligent Information Systems,
pp. 322 ­326, 1994.
[7] YM Chen, K. Biddell, AY Sun, P.A. Relue, J.D. Johnson,
'An automatic cell counting method for optical images,'
Proc. BMES/EMBS, Vol. 2, pp. 819, 1999.
[8] D. Anoraganingrum, `Cell segmentation with median filter
and mathematical morphology operation,' Proc. Intl. Conf.
Image Analysis and Processing, pp. 1043 ­1046, 1999.
[9] V. K. Kovalev, A. Y. Grigoriev, H.-S. Ahn, N.K. Myshkin,
`Segmentation technique of complex image scene for an
automatic blood cell counting system,' Proc. SPIE - Medical
Imaging, Image Processing, Vol. 2710, pp. 805-810, 1996.
[10] H.-S. Wu, J. Gil, J. Barba, `Optimal segmentation of cell
images,' IEE Proc.-Vis. Image Signal Processing., Vol. 145,
No. 1, pp. 50-56, February 1998.
[11] M.-L. Antonie, O. R. Za¨ýane, A. Coman, `Application of
Data Mining Techniques for Medical Image classification,'
Proc. 2nd Int. Workshop Multimedia Data Mining
(MDM/KDD'2001), pp. 94-101, San Francisco, USA, August
26, 2001.
[12] W. Hsu, L. M. Lee, G. K. Goh, `Image Mining in IRIS:
Integrated
Retinal Information System,' Proc.
ACM
SIGMOD, pp. 593, Dellas, Texas, U.S.A., May 2000.
[13] J. R. Quinlan, `C4.5: program for machine learning,' Morgan
Kaufmann, 1992.
[14] K. Fukunaga,`Introduction to Statistical Pattern Recognition,'
2nd Ed, Boston: Academic Press, 1990.
[15] B. Liu, W. Hsu, Y. Ma, `Integrating Classification and
Association Rule Mining,' Proc. 4th Int. Conf. KD. and DM.
(KDD-98, Plenary Presentation), New York, USA, 1998.
[16] H. Freeman, "On the encoding of arbitrary geometric
configurations," IEEE Trans. Electr. Comput., EC-10, pp.
260-268, 1961.




500

