Exploiting Response Models -Optimizing Cross-Sell and
Up-Sell Opportunities in Banking


Andrew Storey

Scotiabank
1 RichmondW., 2"d Floor
Toronto,Ontario,CanadaM5H 1Y8

416.933.2436

andrew.storey~scotiabank.com
Marc-david Cohen

SAS InstituteInc.
SAS CampusDrive
Cary, NC 27513
919.531.7630

marc.cohenC,sas.com


ABSTRACT

The banking industry regularly mounts campaigns to improve
customer value by offering new products to existing customers.
In recent years this approach has gained significant momentum
because of the increasing availability of customer data and the
improved analysis capabilities in data mining. Typically,
response models based on historical data are used to estimate
the probability of a customer purchasing an additional product
and the expected return from that additional purchase. Even
with these computational improvements and accurate models of
customer behavior, the problem of efficiently using marketing
resources to maximize the return on marketing investment is a
challenge. This problem is compounded because of the
capability to launch multiple campaigns through several
distribution channels
over
multiple
time
periods.
The
combination of alternatives creates a complicated array of
possible actions. This paper presents a solution that answers the
question of what products, if any, to offer to each customer in a
way that maximizes the marketing return on investment. The
solution is an improvement over the usual approach of picking
the customers that have the largest expected value for a
particular product because it is a global maximization from the
viewpoint
of
the
bank
and
allows
for
the
effective
implementation of business constraints across customers and
business units. The approach accounts for limited resources,
multiple sequential campaigns, and other business constraints.
Furthermore, the solution provides insight into the cost of these
constraints, in terms of decreased profits, and thus is an
effective tool for both tactical campaign execution and strategic
planning.


Keywords
Database
marketing,
Cross-selling,
Up-selling,
Profit
Optimization, Assignment Problems, Constrained Optimization.
Response Models.



Permissionto makedigital or hard copies of all or pm'tof this work for
personalor classroomuse is grantedwithout fee providedthatcopies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requiresprior specificpermissionand/ora fee.
SIGKDD "02,July 23-26,2002,Edmonton,Alberta,Canada.
Copyright2002 ACM 1-58113-567-X/02/0007...$5.00.
1. INTRODUCTION
The new mantra of database marketing in banking and financial
services is "the right product to the right customer at the right
time". However, a practical and effective implementation of
this goal is not easy to accomplish.
What makes this
particularly difficult is that companies have multiple products
and operate under a complex set of business constraints.
Choosing which products to offer to which customers in order to
maximize the marketing return on investment and meet the
business constraints is enormously complex.
This paper
outlines a framework for solving this problem and presents an
example using data from Scotiabank.

Scotiabank is one of North America's premier financial
institutions; it is comprised of Domestic Banking, Wealth
Management, International Banking and Scotia Capital groups.
The Domestic Bank employs more than 23,000 people and has
over 6 million customers.
The Wealth Management Group
incorporates key personal investment and advisory activities
within the Scotiabank Group.
Scotiabank is the most
international of all Canadian banks, its International Banking
Group has more that 21,000 employees and provides retail
banking services in over 50 countries. The Scotia Capital Group
provides corporate and investment banking on a global basis.
Because of its breadth, Scotiabank is able to offer a full suite of
financialproducts to its clients.

Scotiabank has made a deliberate effort to become a customer-
focused institution, as opposed to a vertical product driven
company. The bank's formally stated goal is "to be the best at
helping customers become financially better off by providing
relevant solutions to their unique needs". A direct consequence
of this goal is that marketing campaigns are multiple product
campaigns as opposed to single product campaigns.
This
transforms the data mining and campaign targeting process from
a fairly simple application of individual response models into a
significantlymore complex problem of choosing which product,
if any, to offer to which customer and through which channel.
The benefit is that campaigns are more customer-focused than in
the past.

1.1 Business Problem
The database marketing community has changed significantly
over the last several years.
In the past, database marketers
applied business rules to target customers directly. Examples
include; targeting customers solely on their product gaps or on
marketers' business intuition. Marketers have also applied RFM




325

type analysis where general recency,frequency, and monetary
measurements as well as product gaps are used to target
customers for specific offers. The current approach, which has
widespread use, relies on predictive response models to target
customers for offers. These models accurately estimate the
probability that a customer will respond to a specificoffer and
can significantly increase the response rate to a product offering.
However,
simply
knowing
a
customer's
probability
of
responding to a particular offer is not enough when a company
has several products to promote and other business constraints
to consider in its marketing planning.

Marketing departments also face the problem of knowing which
productto offer to a customer,not just which customer to offer
a product. In practice, many ad hoe rules are used. Prioritization
rules based on response rates or estimated expected profitability
measures have been used; business rules to prioritize products
that can be marketed are sometimes used; and product response
models to select customers for a particular campaign are also
used. One approach that is easily implemented but, for reasons
outlined later, may not produce optimal customer contact plans
relies on a measure of expected offer profitability (the estimated
probability of response multiplied by the profit given customer
response less direct costs) to choose which products to offer
customers. However, a shortcoming of this approach is its
inability to effectively handle complex constraints on the
customer contact plan.

1.2 Business Constraints
Database marketing departments face several types of business
constraints. Typically, there are

·
restrictions on the minimum and maximum number of
product offers that can be made in a campaign,

·
requirements on minimum expected profit from
product offers,

·
limits on channel capacity,

·
limits on funding available for the campaign, and

·
campaign return-on-investment hurdle rates that must
be met.

These
are
a
sample
of the
constraints
that
marketing
departments must meet when executing a campaign. Ad hoc
approaches are also typically used in an attempt to meet these
constraints.

The opportunity costs of the business constraints are generally
not
known.
Constraints
are
usually
negotiated
between
marketing, product lines and delivery channel management. If
the cost of a constraint was known, then the company could
choose to tighten or to relax the constraint by removing or
adding more resources. For example, channel capacity could be
increased if it were known that there was a significant return on
the investment by doing so. Knowledge of the opportunity costs
could help evaluate these management decisions. Applications
of this will be discussed in the "STRATEGIC USAGES"
section of this article.

Ultimately, the database marketer needs a concrete framework
to effectively act on "the right product to the right customer at
the right time" mantra. The approach we take is to transform
the database-marketing problem into an optimization problem
that is designed to generate the maximum incremental profit
from a limited amount of resources subject to the necessary
business constraints. This paper will describe an actionable
framework that will satisfy this business problem.
2. SOLUTION FRAMEWORK
It is helpful in understanding the solution framework to
understand the data that are available for marketing campaign
planning. Understanding the data will help make the problem
more concrete.

2.1 Data
We assume that there has been a thorough analysis of historical
marketing campaigns and that accurate response probability
models exist for all products in question. The result of these data
mining exercises is a data set that contains an expected profit for
each product for each customer, where the expected profit is
derived from the customer specific probability of response and
the profit generated given a customer response. Needless to say,
these data sets can be rather large. It is not unusual to have over
5 million customer records in such a data set. Let's assume that
there are 10 products and 1 million customers, and that for each
customer and product we have an estimate of the expected profit
given that each customer is offered each product.

2.2 Ideal Approach
The ideal approach to solving this problem is to model it as a
specialized type of assignment problem. This type of problem is
an integer program. It can be unambiguously expressed with a
mathematical formulation. Let xj/= 1 if customer i is offered
product j, and 0 if not; let r//the expected profit of offering
customer i product j; let c~ the cost of offering customer i
product j; let R be the corporate hurdle rate. Then, a very
simplified version of the problem can be expressed as finding
thexqthat satisfy

Max ~ x~iro
U
Subjectto:
Ex'~c#
Campaignbudget
_<
U

E Xij ~ Minimumoffersof product j
i

Z Xi]Fij>_E Xi]Cij(1"FR) Corporate hurdle
#"
ij

x0
{o,1}
This formulation captures only the bare elements of the
problem. It does not account for multiple campaigns composed
of different products, multiple channels, and channel capacity
constraints just to name a few possibilities. However, the model
can easily be extended to cover most typical business
constraints encountered in practice, but the basic formulation
remains the same. It is important to note that this ideal
formulation is difficult to solve because of its scale. For 1
million customers and 10 products there are 10-million integer
variables x~/, this yields 21°'°°°'°°° possible customer-offer
combinations. Using standard optimization methods a problem
of this size can, in principle, result in a branch and cut tree of as
many nodes. Because of this problems of this size are extremely
difficult to soh,e, so we propose an alternative approach. While
not providing a strictly optimal solution, the alternative
approach does provide an approximately optimal solution that in
preliminary studies has shown to be a good approximation.




326

2.3 Practical Approach
Although it is not practical to solve problems formulated in this
ideal way, it is possible to approximate the ideal formulation
and arrive at a formulation that is practical to solve. There are
numerous ways to approach this approximation; one approach is
to sample from the customer base and use that sample as
representative for the optimization. Another approach (and the
one that we take) is to aggregate customers based on the
coefficients r// in the ideal formulation. Aggregation can be
considered natural
in this
setting particularly when we
understand that much of the data is consistent and estimated. For
example, the cost data c¢ are most likely to be consistent across
customers for a given product. Similarly, the estimated expected
profit re is most likely the result of data mining techniques such
as predictive response models. The implementation of this
framework is loosely coupled to the chosen form of the
predictive response models. As long as the customer/offer
specific response rate is represented as a probability, the
proposed framework can handle it.
Scotiabank uses standard,
accepted statistical and data mining approaches to obtain these
estimates.

The aggregation process we use involves conversion of the raw
data into a form that can be used naturally
in a linear
programming optimization model. The key is to cluster the raw
data rq and use the clusters as the aggregate. Unlike the usual
use of clustering, the purpose here is not the identification of
customer segments or to differentiate groups of customers, but
to aggregate customers into similar groups. This is an important
distinction to keep in mind since clustering is most frequently
used to distinguish, not to aggregate. If the clusters are
internally consistent, then the cluster centroids can be used as
representative of the data for all the customers within a single
cluster.

This aggregation enables the problem to be reformulated as a
linear program so that rather than assigning offers to individual
customers, as the ideal integer program does, the program
identifies proportions within each cluster for each product offer.
This can be accomplished with similar constraints to those of
the ideal formulation. Moreover, the linear program is much
smaller and much easier to solve. Note however, the solution
may require that multiple products are offered to proportions of
customers within a single cluster. When that happens, a new
problem is defined that is a simple assignment problem at the
level of the cluster, where multiple offers are to be assigned
within the cluster, and it is relatively easy to solve.

It should also be noted that preliminary experiments solving the
approximation with varying numbers clusters indicate that as the
number of clusters increases the value of the objective quickly
rises then slowly converges to the integer relaxed solution.
Further study is needed to identify a good number of clusters
that work in a "typical" setting.

2.3.1 Formulation
Consider the following variables defining raw data as input into
the solution algorithm. Let y/j be the number of customers in
cluster i that are offered product j; let r'ii be the estimated
expected profit given that customer in cluster i is offered of
product j; let c'// be the cost of offering a customer in cluster i
product j; let R be the corporate hurdle rate. Then, a very
simplified version of the problem can be expressed as finding
the Yii that satisfy
Subjectto:

~y~ -<
J
Max E y/j r~
iJ



Numbercustomersin cluster i


·yo.c·
Campaign budget
_<

U

E y/] >_ Minimumoffersof product j

i

t
~yo.ri; >_~yijcij(1 + R)
Corporate hurdle rate
ij
ij

y~. >_0

Once the yg that satisfy the formulation are found, the optimal
proportions that they give must be applied to the customers
within the specific clusters. For example, suppose that y//is the
total number of customers in cluster i. Then, every customer in
that cluster should be offered product j. Alternatively, suppose
that for a given i, y/j > 0 and y//, > 0 for j ~ j'. Then, y// of
customers in cluster i must be offered product j and Yii' of
customers in cluster i must be offered product j'. The optimal
way to do that is to solve a simple assignment problem using the
estimated expected profit r/j for the individual customers and not
the clusters. It is important to note that some of the constraints
may be violated as a result of solving this assignment problem
particularly if the cluster centroids used in the linear program
formulation are involved in a tight constraint and not consistent
within the cluster.

3. A TACTICAL EXAMPLE
We demonstrate this approach with data from Scotiabank and
using existing procedures within the SAS system to implement
the formulation described above. The details of the SAS code
will not be given.

Eleven unique offers were to be considered: five investment,
three lending and three day-to-day banking offers.
The
investment offers included GICs, mutual funds, Registered
Education Savings Program (RESP) and two unique discount
brokerage offers. The lending offers included a mortgage and
two credit card offers. The day-to-day banking offers included
one of two Scotia online banking service offers and a deposit
account acquisition. The term campaign is used here to imply
one large pro-active customer
contact campaign that it
comprised of eleven distinct offers, it can be thought of as
eleven single product campaigns that are being offered at
generally the same time to a non-overlapping set of customers.
For the purposes of this paper the detailed product offer
descriptions have been suppressed. Approximately 2.5 million
customers were included in the potential universe for the
campaign.

Ultimately, the goal of marketing campaigns is to produce a
positive return on investment for the company that exceeds the
corporate investment hurdle rate. Although the timeframe upon
which this investment should be measured may be debatable,
the goal is fundamental to the bank.
To achieve this specific
objective, the bank can execute marketing campaigns that are
designed to maximize the expected incremental profit through
making one of several offers to some of its customers, or
potential customers.




327

3.1 Response Models
The expected incremental profit of a specific offer to a customer
is an estimate based on response models and detailed product
profitability calculations.
These response models are used to
estimate the probability that a customer will accept a specific
offer.
Scotiabank's data warehouse has detailed account level
profitability calculations
for all of its products·
This
profitability information is used to estimate the near term
incremental profit given that the customer accepts the specific
offer. Once a specific offer is made to a customer there are two
possible outcomes: the customer can accept or reject the offer.
Using the offer specific response models the probability of both
states is known for each customer. The incremental profit for
both states is also known; it is zero if the customer rejects the
offer and the mean near-term profitability for new accounts of
the specific type if the offer is accepted· With this information,
the expected incremental profit of the offer can be calculated for
each customer/offer combination.
The cost of making each
offer is also known and is largely dependent on the channel
through which the offer is made.

3.2 Channels
Scotiabank has several distribution channels through which
campaigns can be executed.
The main channels for direct
marketing are direct mail, retail branch centres and call centres.
For this example we assume that leads sent to the branch
officers and call centres are follow-ups from a direct mail piece
and that offers designated as direct mail are direct mail only.
The use of the branch and call centres for follow-ups has been
shown to have a positive effect on the probability of response to
the offer when compared to direct mail alone· Of course, the
lead delivery costs vary with the channel used. In this example
we have used costs per lead of $3.00, $1.50 and $1.00 for the
branch, call centre and direct mail only channels respectively·

3.3 Business Constraints
Several practical issues surround the campaign execution
process that affects the customer/offer selection process, for this
application to be acceptable for implementation these business
constraints must be maintained.
The following business rules
have been translated into constraints that can be applied to the
optimization model:

·
Campaign costs cannot exceed $1 million.

·
The campaign must have a return on investment of at least
the corporate hurdle rate. In this example we have used
20%, which is not necessarily the bank's actual corporate
hurdle rate.

·
The branch and call centre channels have a certain capacity
constraint for timely processing of campaign generated
leads.
In the example, the call centre can accept up to
500,000 leads, the branch can handle up to 250,000 leads
and direct mail is unlimited·

·
Product offer minimums are also required to satisfy
internal bank objectives· For the purposes of this example
we set all offer minimums to 20,000 with two exceptions.
The RESP offer, which has an extremely limited eligible
universe, had a lower bound of 2,500 and one of the Scotia
online offers had a lower bound of 5,000·

·
Cannot offer products to customers who already have that
product at Scotiabank.
·
The standard marketing exclusions, such as credit risk or
do not solicit, must also be strictly adhered to.

3.4 Solution
The estimates tier customer/offer expected incremental profit,
costs and business constraints serve as inputs to the profit
optimization phase
of the campaign
design.
The profit
optimization phase is independent of the construction of these
inputs. This means that as response models, profit estimates or
costs are refined as long as the results are represented in the
same manner, the optimization phase will be able to accept them
as inputs.
This property is important as the bank is constantly
testing and refining these inputs as the marketplace is ever
changing.

3.4.1 Results
The result of this algorithm is an allocation, of a specific offer,
or no offer, to each customer·
Also output is the associated
expected incremental profit by customer making that offer· This
solution is a SAS data set that has a customer identifier, the
expected return, offer and channel designation. The full data set
is 2·5'million records; the table below shows the first 25 records.

Customer Id
Product
Channel
00182723
00200688
00032937
Return



00722119
02137391
00992639
00060721
Offer2
Direct Mail
00483601
0.0605
01164964
00025469
01008244
00179891
00410488
Offer10
Direct Mall
01484008
00184804
03350118
O0983111
00387834
"
Offer5"
Call Center
01100914
01507075
01559899
00309931
,, 00657640
01095694
02075404
Figure 1. Sample of the solution dataset.
3.1852




l l l l
I
I



To better understand the solution, it is useful to look at several
charts that summarize the solution and a report that is produced
by the algorithm.

3.4.2 Offers
The Offer Frequencies by Channel chart, Figure 2, provides a
graphical representation of the distribution of offers by channel
and is useful for understanding the solution· This figure shows
that few of the contacts have a branch follow-up treatment,
some have call centre follow-ups and most have just the direct
mail treatment. Offer 10 has the largest quantity of contacts and
is spread across the direct mail and call centre channels. The
Constraint Report, Figure 3, provides significantly more insight
into the nature of the derived solution.




328

Frequencies by Channel




Figure 2. Offer Frequencies.


3.4.3 Business Constraints
The Constraint Report summarizes the constraints applied to the
problem as well as outlines the chosen level and marginal costs
associated with each constraint.




Figure 3. Constraint Report.


The last line of the Constraint Report in Figure 3 shows
that the objective function, expected profit, was maximized
at $3.58 million from an expenditure of $1 million. This
results in a 258% return on investment for the campaign.

The first two lines in Figure 3, Branch Capacity and Call
Center Capacity, summarize the results of the branch and
call centre capacity constraints respectively. The branch
capacity for follow-up contacts was limited to 250,000 and
the call centre to 500,000.
In the solution, only 2,180
contacts were assigned to the branch, and 202,258 to the
call centre, for follow-up calls.
This low quantity of
follow-up contacts, at either the branch or the call centre, is
due to the conservative estimate of the increased response
rates resulting from the follow-up and the significantly
higher cost, $3.00 for branch and $1.50 for call centre, as
compared to direct mail only, $ 1.00.
·
The third constraint, Campaign Cost, limits the total costs
for the campaign to $1 million. This constraint is in fact
tight, meaning that the optimal solution was restricted by
the condition.
The marginal value of the constraint is
$1.53, this means that an additional $1 spent on the
campaign would result in a $1.53 increase in expected
profit.

·
The offer constraints show the lower bounds for each of the
specific offers.
Notice that 5 of the 11 products were
limited by their lower bounds. In the solution, Offer 9 was
only made to 20,000 people. If that constraint were to be
decreased by one unit, e.g. to 19,999, then the objective
function, expected profit, would be increasedby $1.48 - so
the cost, on expected profit, of this business constraint is
clear.

3.4.4 Profitability
The estimated Profitability by Channel report, Figure 4, clearly
reveals the quality of leads that are sent to the respective
channels.
The branch follow-up leads have a significantly
higher expected incremental profit than for call centre follow-up
leads or direct mail alone. The call centre is also sent leads that
are more profitable than direct mail alone.
A few comments
about the way that the channel effects were modeled are
necessary to fully understand this result.



Prom by Chann~


iJ




t[



Figure 4. Profitability Report.


The differential effects of the various channels enter the
response models as a main effect.
A call centre follow-up
treatment increases the probability of response as compared to
no call centre follow-up treatment.
The branch follow-up
treatment has the same directional effect as the call centre,
although larger.
As such, everything else the same, the
expected profit from making an identical offer to a customer
with a branch or call centre follow-up is greater than without the
follow-up. As such we would expect to see a higher expected
rate
of return
when
applying
the
additional
follow-up
treatments, although not at this magnitude. There is some other
factor driving the higher rate of return, in fact, it is the channel
selection by the optimization routine.




329

Recall that the channel costs are fixed at $1.00, $1.50 and $3.00
for direct mail only, call centre follow-up and branch follow-up
respectively.
The incremental expected profit enters the
equation through an increase in response rate.
For a branch
follow-up to be more profitable than an offer made without a
branch follow-up it must be the ease that:

Prob Branch ·Profit -Cost Branch> PrOboM . Profit -Cost DM

Profit. (Prob Branch- Prob DM) > Cost Branch-- Cost DM

Profit. (Prob Branch- Prob DM) > 3 - 1

Profit. (Prob Branch-- PrObDM ) > 2

Either the profit given that the customer accepts (Profit) or the
incremental effect on the response probability of the Branch
follow-up (ProbBran~ - ProbDu) is large enough to overcome
the $2 increase in contact costs
(COStBranch
-
Costou).
The
greater the difference in this inequality the more beneficial the
follow-up contact is. The difference can be large if a highly
profitable product is being offered, or the increase in the
probability of response is high. For reasonable values of the
probability of response from the direct mail (Probou), the
increase in response rate due to a branch follow-up (ProbBran~-
Probou) will rise with an increase in the probability of response
from the direct mail (Probou). From a business perspective, this
means that either highly profitable offers and/or customers who
are most likely to respond to the offer will tend to be given a
follow-up treatment.
This is a particularly important result
when dealing with the business owners of the call centre and
branch channels.

3.5 Summary of Tactical Example
In summary, the solution provided an approximately optimal
solution to the ideal capacitated assignment problem.
The
output is a decision, for each customer as to which, if any,
product to offer and through what channel.
The campaign
expected profit is $3.58 million on $1 million invested, for a
return on investment of 258%. Using an ad hoe approach, that
utilized response models and near term profit, and met all the
business constraints the most profit that could be generated was
$2.65 million on $1 million invested for a campaign return on
investment of 165%.
The boost in the campaign return on
investment of 93% is entirely attributable to the quality of the
solution produced by the optimization process as opposed to the
ad hoe approach.

4. STRATEGIC USES
Although this technique was developed primarily for its tactical
application, as described above, it has some significant strategic
applications too. The strategic applications are in the area of
capacity planning. Two insights will be discussed, one dealing
with campaign budgeting and the other with channel capacity
planning.

4.1 Campaign Budget Allocation
In general, campaign budgets are determined prior to the
campaign design.
The degree of analysis that goes into
determining specific campaign budgets, or annual campaign
budgets, can vary greatly from institution to institution. As a
strategic
tool,
the
optimization technique
provides
an
opportunity to determine the effects of making different budget
allocations - in the budgeting process.

For example, in determining how much money to invest in a
campaign, it wold be useful to know the marginal return on an
additional dollar investment. This is reported at $1.53 in Figure
3 as the marginal value of the $1 million cost constraint. Given
the campaign definition, all of the other constraints and the
current customer base, investing one more dollar would result in
an increase in profit of $1.53. If marginal return on investment
is greater than the corporate hurdle rate then that supports an
argument to increase the investment.

This technique provides a compelling and empirically based
process for altering, positively or negatively, the campaign
budget.
Of course, other considerations go into budget
allocations but the technique could shed light onto the impact of
such decisions.

4.2 Channel Capacity Planning
Similarly, channel capacity planning can benefit from this
technique.
It is understood that in the short run, channel
capacity is fixed, although in the long run, or planning mode,
channel capacity can be changed.

Again, from the Constraint Report, Figure 3, if it appears as
though a specific channel is used to capacity, then we can look
at the marginal value of the constraint. The marginal value of
these constraints gives the increase in profit, the objective
function, given a one-unit increase in channel capacity. With
the cost of this increase in capacity quantified, one can
determine if the additional investment in the channel is
warranted. This also helps to quantify the opportunity costs of
having branch staff shift away from non-campaignrelated work.
Again, this is from the perspective of campaign execution, there
are other benefits to channel capacity augmentation that would
also have to be taken into account, but at least the campaign
benefits would be understood.

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
In addition to using the solution for capacity planning the
approach lends itself to analyzing the sensitivity of the solution
to changing assumptions. This is particularly useful for
evaluating the solution to changes in the business constraints.

For example, a scenario can be optimized with several
alternative budget constraints. Figure 5 shows the results from
solving a model that is very similar to that discussed above.
Each row in the table corresponds to a different limit on the total
cost of the canapaign. All the other constraints and data in the
model are held constant. The first scenario allocates at most
$1,000,000 on the campaign, the second $1,250,000 and the
third $1,500,000. For each of these scenarios the optimal
solution is calculated and the expected return from that solution,
the number of offers through the branch, and the ROI, are also
shown in the figure.

Cost

1,000,000


1,250,000


1,500,000
Return


3,756,135


4,132,821


4,426,410
BranchAcfl~ty ] ROI


94,088
275%


148,518
230%


250,000
t 195%

Figure 5. Effects of increased campaign size.

It is interesting to note that for each of these scenarios, as for the
example above, the branch capacity is 250,000 offers. However,
until the size of the campaign, as measured by the cost of the
campaign, reaches $1,500,000, the branch channel is not used to




330

its capacity. This means that for campaigns with a budget less
than $1,500,000 there is excess capacity in this channel and its
value is lost. The additional $500,000 expenditure results in an
additional $670,000 return with a 34% ROI and no excess
branch capacity.

5. SHORTCOMINGS
The shortcomings of this approach can be broadly classified into
two categories: business and technical.
From a business
perspective there are three perceived shortcomings of this
solution. These shortcomings are related to the required inputs
to the solution, changes in the types of campaign design
decisions, and post analysis, which are performed by the
business user. From a technical perspective there are two
general shortcomings of this approach. The first is related to the
constraints, and the second is related to the acceptable problem
size.

5.1 Business Perspective Shortcomings
The approach requires as an input the expected incremental
profit associated with each offer and customer combination.
Fundamentally this implies the creation, and maintenance, of
offer specific probability of response models and detailed
profitability measurements.
Both of these inputs require
ongoing maintenance and enhancement, as the marketplace is
ever changing.
This requirement does not seem to be too
onerous
as
most
organizations
that
would
consider
implementing this solution are likely already are producing
these inputs.

The types of decisions made by business users will be altered
with the adoption of this approach. The business users will be
making decisions that affect the objective function and
constraints but not directly about how many offers to make of
each type or through which distribution channel. At first the
business users might resist this solution, as the decisions that are
being made by the business are more abstract than those made
during the business as usual campaign design process. Although
the business users are making more abstract decisions about
campaign design, they are actually gaining more effective
control over the campaign. Thus the successful adoption of this
process would likely involve some amount of business user
education with respect to the design of the optimization
problem.

The solution was designed to explicitly maximize the expected
incremental profitability from running a campaign, not to
maximize the overall response rate of the campaign.
For
instance, a customer might have a higher estimated response
probability to a low rate credit card offer than a high rate card.
However, the profitability given offer acceptance could be
substantially higher for the high rate card. If the goal were to
maximize the response rate, then the low rate card would be
offered.
Whereas, if the goal were to maximize profitability
then the offer with the greatest expected profitability would be
made. This is only a shortcoming in the sense that business
users' expectations have to be managed as campaign response
rates are more easily and quickly measured than is campaign
profitability.



5.2 Technical Perspective Shortcomings
As this solution was developed in a linear programming
framework the constraints must be expressed as linear functions
of the choice variables,
A couple of examples of plausible
business constraints that are non-linear and therefore do not
work with the linear programming approach are:

·
The number of credit card offers must be greater than
20,000 or equal to zero.

·
The cost of a specific offer is a function of the number of
those specific offers being made.

The scalability of this approach has not been exhaustively
explored. Tests have been run on data sets with 2.5 million
customers, 11 offers and 3 distributionchannels and the solution
is generated in an acceptable amount of time and resources. The
solution was explicitly designed to scale well to the number of
customers. Scalability in the offer and channel dimensions is
significantly more
expensive
than
along
the
customer
dimension. Although, the number of distribution channels that a
company can utilize in an automated campaign is not too large;
the number of possible products that could be offered could
grow well beyond eleven.

6. CONCLUSION
This offer optimization approach provides three significant
improvements over other, more standard, approaches to the
problem of campaign design.

·
First and foremost, the developed solution produces
significantly more incremental profit than competing
solutions. As demonstrated in the tactical example, the
campaign incremental profit is almost twice as high as that
of the standard approach.

·
Secondly, this technique is designed to implement multiple
constraints and therefore affords the business more control
over the direct marketing process. Attempting to satisfy
several business constraints simultaneously using ad hoe
techniques is a very labor-intensive task and generally
produces poor results.

·
Finally, the additional information that can be presented as
a part of this solution can provide the business with more
insight into the customer base, product offerings and the
effects of the constraints.

This insight can be used to guide the company to craft better
investment decisions in order to make future campaigns even
more successful.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to the three anonymous referees whose suggestions
helped clarify our discussion.

8. REFERENCES
Campell, D., Erdahl, R., Johnson, D., Bibelnieks, E., Haydock,
M., Bullock, M., and Crowder, H. (2001), "Optimizing
Customer Mail Streams at Fingerhut," Interfaces, (31), 77-90.

Cohen, M. (2000), "Offer Optimization, Optimizing customer
value," SAS Internal TechnicalPaper. May 2001.

Cohen, M., and Parks, J. (2000), "Optimizing the Allocation of
Cross-Selling Effort," Proceedings of the DiamondSug 2000
Conference, San Francisco.

Cohen, M. (2000), "Targeted Marketing, Optimizing the
customer/event/channel assignment," SAS Internal Technical
Paper. December 2000.

Nemhauser, G., and Wolsey, L. Integer and Combinatorial
Optimization, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988.




331

