Identifying Early Buyers from Purchase Data


Paat Rusmevichientong


Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
paatrus@orie.cornell.edu
Shenghuo Zhu
Amazon.com
Seattle, WA
shenghuo@amazon.com
David Selinger
Amazon.com
Seattle, WA
selly@amazon.com



ABSTRACT
Market research has shown that consumers exhibit a vari-
ety of different purchasing behaviors; specifically, some tend
to purchase products earlier than other consumers. Iden-
tifying such early buyers can help personalize marketing
strategies, potentially improving their effectiveness. In this
paper, we present a non-parametric approach to the prob-
lem of identifying early buyers from purchase data. Our
formulation takes as inputs the detailed purchase informa-
tion of each consumer, with which we construct a weighted
directed graph whose nodes correspond to consumers and
whose edges correspond to purchases consumers have in com-
mon; the edge weights indicate how frequently consumers
purchase products earlier than other consumers.
Identifying early buyers corresponds to the problem of
finding a subset of nodes in the graph with maximum dif-
ference between the weights of the outgoing and incoming
edges. This problem is a variation of the maximum cut
problem in a directed graph. We provide an approximation
algorithm based on semidefinite programming (SDP) relax-
ations pioneered by Goemans and Williamson, and analyze
its performance. We apply the algorithm to real purchase
data from Amazon.com, providing new insights into con-
sumer behaviors.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.2.8 [Database
Management]: Database Applications ­ Data Mining

General Terms: Algorithms, Theory, Economics.

Keywords: consumer behavior, early buyers, semidefinite
programming, social network.


1. INTRODUCTION
Marketing literature has long recognized differences be-
tween early and late buyers [2]. Although no precise defini-
tion for these two groups of consumers exists, the term early
buyers generally refers to consumers who tend to purchase
products earlier than other consumers. Identifying these
This
work was done while the author was at Amazon.com.




Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
KDD'04, August 22­25, 2004, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-888-1/04/0008 ...$5.00.
early buyers can help personalize marketing strategies. Fur-
thermore, we can potentially use sales information among
early buyers to predict product trends, forecast sales, or
guide new product introduction. The problem of identifying
and distinguishing early buyers has received much attention
in the marketing literature [6].
In this paper, we present a non-parametric approach to
the problem of identifying early buyers from purchase data.
Our formulation takes as inputs the detailed purchase in-
formation of each consumer, and partitions the consumers
into two sets: early and late buyers. We construct from the
purchase data a weighted directed graph whose nodes corre-
spond to consumers. We have an edge from node i to node j
with weight wij  0 if, among the products that consumer i
and j bought in common, wij of these products were bought
by consumer i before consumer j. A large value of wij rel-
ative to wji indicates that, in general, consumer i bought
many products before consumer j.
Using the above graphical representation, the problem of
identifying early buyers can be formulated as a variation of
a maximum cut problem in a directed graph. Using tech-
niques pioneered by Goemans and Williamson [5], we pro-
vide an approximation algorithm based on semidefinite pro-
gramming (SDP) relaxations and analyze its performance.
We apply the algorithm to real purchase data from Ama-
zon.com, providing new insights into consumer behaviors.
Let us briefly contrast our graph-based formulation with
another approach for identifying early buyers. As a proxy for
the set of early buyers, we might consider, for each product,
the first x% of consumers who purchased the product, or
those consumers who purchased the product before a certain
cutoff date. Then, we can combine these sets of consumers
together. This simple approach raises many questions: How
do we choose the cutoff point for each product? Also, how
do we combine the various sets of consumers together?
Our formulation obviates the need to answer these ques-
tions since the graphical representation encapsulates all of
the relevant purchase information of each consumer. More-
over, we will show that the set of early buyers has a natural
interpretation in our graph-based formulation, correspond-
ing to the set of nodes with maximum difference between
weights of the outgoing and incoming edges. We believe
that the intuitive formulation and the interpretability of the
solution constitute some of the advantages of our formula-
tion over other approaches.

1.1 Contributions and Literature Review
Our work relates to the study of the diffusion of inno-
vations in the marketing literature. Management science



671
Research Track Poster

researchers have attempted to understand and model the
evolution of product sales over time, assuming that product
sales arise from two groups of consumers: innovators who
tend to buy products early, and imitators who tend to buy
products later [2]. Models developed in this literature typ-
ically assume that product sales over time follow a specific
parametric form [6, 7]. Most of the research focus on esti-
mating the model parameters from data and understanding
the evolution of product sales over time, without character-
izing each individual consumer. Our work shares with this
line of research a common goal of understanding the behav-
ior of early and late buyers. Departing from this line of
research, however, we focus on characterizing each individ-
ual consumer and identifying those who are early buyers.
We should note that our work differs from recent works
in the study of social networks [4, 8]. Most of this research
attempts to model the influence among consumers and un-
derstand how this influence propagates in the networks. Al-
though our work aims to identify consumers who tend to
purchase products before other consumers, we do not know
if these early buyers actually influence the late buyers to
adopt the products.
Agrawal et al. [1] proposed a similar graphical representa-
tion for the problem of identifying consumers who are "for"
or "against" a particular topic in newsgroup postings. They
modelled the links between newsgroup postings as an un-
weighted undirected graph and formulated the problem as
the standard maximum cut problem. Our formulation dif-
fers from this approach in the use of a weighted directed
graph. Our representation applies to consumer purchase
data, with a different interpretation from the graph used by
Agrawal et al. [1]. Moreover, it turns out that the problem
of identifying early buyers differs from the standard maxi-
mum cut problem and requires a dedicated analysis.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follow:

· We present a non-parametric approach to the prob-
lem of identifying early buyers, making use of a new
graphical representation of purchase data.

· We provide an approximation algorithm with provable
performance bounds.

· We apply our algorithm to real purchase data from
Amazon.com, providing new insights into consumer
behaviors.

1.2 Organization
In Section 2, we present a detailed problem formulation
and show how our formulation relates to the problem of
finding a maximum likelihood assignment under a certain
probabilistic model. Section 3 presents an approximation
algorithm based on semidefinite programming relaxations.
Then, in Section 4, we apply our algorithm to real pur-
chase data from Amazon.com and identify new insights gen-
erated from our analysis. Section 5 presents conclusions and
discusses possible improvements. Due to space constraints,
most of the results are stated without proofs. For more de-
tails, the reader is referred to a full-length version of our
paper.


2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
Assume that we have M consumers indexed by 1, 2,..., M
and n products. We have the detailed purchase information
of each consumer, including the date and time of each pur-
chase. We will represent this information using a weighted
directed graph G = (V, V × V, w), where each node v 
V = {1,...,M} corresponds to a consumer. The mapping
w : V ×V 
+
represents the non-negative weight on each
edge. We have an edge (i,j)  V ×V with weight wij  0 if,
among the products that consumer i and j bought in com-
mon, wij of these products were bought by i before j. For
ease of exposition, we represent a missing edge from i to j as
an edge with zero weight. An edge (i,j) with wij = 0 means
that either consumer i and j never bought any product in
common, or that, among products that i and j bought in
common, consumer i always purchased them after consumer
j. Note that for any i and j, the sum of wij and wji equals
the total number of products purchased by consumer i and
j. A large value of wij relative to wji indicates that con-
sumer i and j bought many of the same products, and in
most cases, consumer i bought them before consumer j.
We want to identify consumers who tend to purchase
products earlier than other consumers. Let us briefly discuss
the underlying motivations leading up to the final formula-
tion considered in this paper. Since the weight of each edge
measures how frequently a consumer bought products be-
fore another consumer, as a first try, we might formulate
the problem as a maximum cut problem. In that case, we
want to find a subset S  V with maximum weights of the
outgoing edges, i.e.


(i,j)S×Sc
wij = max
Y V
(i,j)Y ×Y
c
wij,


where Y
c
denotes the set of nodes not in Y .
The above formulation determines the subset of consumers
who have bought the greatest number of products before
all other consumers. However, this criterion does not quite
capture our notions of early buyers, as demonstrated in the
following example.

Example 1. Assume that we have 3 consumers {1, 2, 3}
and the following 4 edges with nonzero weight:

w12 = 10,
w21 = 9,
w13 = 3,
and w23 = 3.

The standard maximum cut formulation will identify {1} as
the early buyer and label {2, 3} as late buyers. However,
the set of early buyers should be {1, 2} since these two con-
sumers bought so many products earlier than the other con-
sumer (consumer 3). In addition, consumer 1 bought prod-
ucts before consumer 2 only slightly more than half of the
time (10/19). So, it does not seem reasonable to character-
ize consumer 1 as an early buyer, while labelling consumer
2 as a late buyer.

It follows from the above example that early buyers should
correspond to those consumers who bought more products
earlier relative to other consumers. We thus need to take
into account the weights of the incoming edges as well. So,
an alternative formulation that we might consider is the fol-
lowing:

max
Y V
(i,j)Y ×Y
c
(wij - wji) .


We can also put different weights on incoming and outgoing
edges. In Section 2.1, we will show how these weights are
related to the probability that an early buyer will purchase



672
Research Track Poster

a product before a late buyer. This leads us the following
general formulation, named EARLY BUYERS (G,,):

max
Y V
(i,j)Y ×Y
c
(wij - wji) ,


where the parameters  and  denote the weights associated
with outgoing and incoming edges, respectively.
The following result follows immediately from the fact
that EARLY BUYERS(G,1, 0) corresponds to the standard
maximum cut problem in a directed graph.

Theorem 1. EARLY BUYERS(G,,) is NP-complete.

2.1 A Probabilistic Interpretation
In this section, we provide a probabilistic interpretation
for our formulation, showing that the EARLY BUYERS
problem is related to the problem of finding a maximum
likelihood assignment in a certain probabilistic model. This
probabilistic view provides an alternative interpretation for
the parameters  and .
For each consumer i  {1, ...,M}, let Xi denote a binary
random variable that indicates the state of consumer i, with
Xi = 1 indicating an early buyer and Xi = 0 indicating a
late buyer. Assume that X1, ...,XM are independent and
identically distributed with Pr {Xi = 1} = p0 for all i.
Under this model, we assume that we have an infinite
number of products, a reasonable assumption in our setting
since Amazon.com sells millions of products. Let Wij de-
note the weight of the edge (i,j). Conditioned on Xi and
Xj, we assume that Wij has a geometric distribution with
parameter f(Xi,Xj), i.e. for any wij  Z+,
Pr {Wij = wij|Xi = xi,Xj = xj} = (1 - f(xi,xj)) f(xi,xj)wij,

where


f(xi, xj) =
p1
if xi = 1 and xj = 0,
1 - p1
if xi = 0 and xj = 1,
1/2
if xi = 0 and xj = 0,
1/2
if xi = 1 and xj = 1

for some parameter 0 < p1 < 1. The parameter p1 corre-
sponds to the probability that an early buyer will purchase
a product before a late buyer. In this model, whenever two
nodes have the same state, we assume that the probability
of having an edge between nodes is 1/2.
We can consider the problem of finding an assignment
x = (x1, ...,xM)  {0, 1}M that maximizes the likelihood
of the graph G under this model. For any x = (x1,... ,xM),
let S0 = {i : xi = 0} and let S1 = {i : xi = 1}. Then, it can
be shown that the log-likelihood l(x1,.. .,xM) is given by

l(x1, ...,xM) = log Pr{Wij = wij i,j and Xk = xk k}
= (x) +
(i,j)S1×Sc
1
(wij - wji) ,


where for any x = (x1,..., xM)  {0, 1}M,

(x) = |S0|log(1 - p0) + |S1|log p0

+ |S0||S1| log(4p1(1 - p1)) + log
1
2
(i,j)V×V
(wij + 1) ,


 = log 2p1, and  = -log 2(1-p1). Since (x) depends on
x only through
ÈM
j=1
xj, this observation leads directly to
the following lemma.
Lemma 1. Let  and  be defined as above. Then, for
any 0  K  M,

argmax
x:
È
M
j=1
xj=K
l (x1, ...,xM) = argmax
Y :|Y |=K
(i,j)Y ×Y
c
(wij - wji) .


The above lemma shows that finding a set of early buyers of
size K is equivalent to finding a maximum likelihood assign-
ment of X1,. ..,XM subject to the constraint that exactly
K of the Xi's are one.
The above lemma also establishes a relationship between
the parameters , , and the probability p1 that an early
buyer will purchase a product before a late buyer. We
showed that  = log 2p1 and  = - log 2(1 - p1). This
result allows us to estimate the parameters  and  from
p1. Also, if we assume that this probability is at least 1/2,
then it follows that   .


3. ALGORITHMS
In this section, we develop algorithms for solving the EARLY
BUYERS problem. Section 3.1 presents an exact polynomial-
time algorithm for a special case when  = . Then, Section
3.2 presents an approximation method for the general prob-
lem.
To facilitate our discussion, let us introduce the follow-
ing notations that will be used throughout the paper. For
any   0 and   0, let ZMAX (,) denotes the opti-
mal value of the EARLY BUYERS (G,, ) problem, i.e.
ZMAX(,) = maxY
V
È
(i,j)Y ×Y
c
(wij - wji).

3.1 A Special Case When  = 
When  = , it turns out that the EARLY BUYERS
problem can be solved efficiently via a simple algorithm.
This result is stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 2. For   0,

ZMAX(,) = 
(i,j)SG×Sc
G
(wij - wji),


where SG =
Ò
i  V :
È
jV
wij 
È
jV
wji
Ó
.

It follows from the above theorem that, when  = ,
we can determine the optimal cut for the EARLY BUY-
ERS problem from the difference, at each node, between
the weights of the outgoing edges and of the incoming edges.
The optimal cut corresponds to those vertices whose differ-
ence is non-negative.

3.2 General  and 
Although we have an efficient algorithm for solving the
EARLY BUYERS problem when  = , it is unlikely that
such an algorithm can be found for general  and . In
this section, we develop an approximation algorithm based
on semidefinite programming relaxations pioneered by Goe-
mans and Williamson [5].

3.2.1 Integer Programming Formulation
We will first formulate the EARLY BUYERS problem as
an integer quadratic programming as follows:

Maximize
È
i,j
wij
4
fij(y0, yi,yj)

subject to :
yi  {-1, +1},
i,



673
Research Track Poster

where for any (i,j)  V × V,
fij(y0,yi,yj) = (( - )(1 - yiyj) + ( + )y0(yi - yj))
Note that for y0,yi,yj  {-1, +1},


fij(y0, yi,yj) =
4,
if y0 = yi and yi = yj,
-4,
if y0 = yj and yi = yj,
0,
otherwise.

The above function is non-zero only when yi = yj. More-
over, the variable y0 can be used to determine which side of
the graph constitutes a cut. Given yi's, we define a cut S
as the set {i : yi = y0}. The above formulation differs from
the standard maximum cut formulation (Section 6.3 in [5])
because our objective function can be negative.
We will now relax the above integer programming problem
to the following semidefinite programming problem (P):

Max
i,j
wij
4
(( - )(1 - vi · vj) + ( + )v0 · (vi - vj))

(P)
subject to : vi  Sn,
i.
where Sn = {v 
n
: v
2
= 1} denotes the n-dimensional
unit sphere. It follows from [5] that the above problem (P)
is a semidefinite programming problem, and can be solved
efficiently. Our algorithm proceeds as follows:

Algorithm:

1. Solve the problem (P) and obtain solutions v0,... ,vn.

2. Generate a random vector r that is uniformly dis-
tributed on Sn.

3. Define y1, ...,yn as follows: yi = 1 if sgn(vi · r) =
sgn(v0 · r) and yi = -1 otherwise.

4. Define a cut S as {i : yi = 1}.

3.2.2 Performance Bounds
In this section, we offer bounds on the performance of our
solution. Since our objective function can be negative, the
standard analysis of the error bounds for the maximum cut
problem does not apply directly in this case. We will provide
a dedicated analysis specific to this problem.
Let v0,v1,. ..,vM denote the solutions of the semidefinite
program (P) given in Section 3.2.1, and let y1,...,yM de-
note the integral solution found after the randomized round-
ing. Let us introduce the following notations. Let Wtotal de-
note the total weights of all edges, i.e. Wtotal =
È
(i,j)V×V
wij.
Let ZP (,) denote the optimal value of the semidefinite
programming relaxation problem (P). Finally, let ZH(,)
denote the of the value of the cut S determined by our al-
gorithm after the randomized rounding. Note that for any
 and , ZH(,)  ZMAX(,)  ZP(,).
The main result of this section is stated in the following
theorem, which relates the expected value of the cut pro-
duced by our algorithm to the optimal value. The proof of
this result relies on techniques similar to that of Goemans
and Williamson [5].

Theorem 3. Let  = inf0

2


1-cos 
 0.87856. Then,


 
E
¢
ZH(,)
£
+ Wtotal
ZMAX(,) + Wtotal
 1,

where  = max
¨
,
+
2
©
.
Let us briefly discuss the performance bound given in The-
orem 3 and the choice of Wtotal which appears in the result.
Note that our objective function can be negative, and let us
denote its minimum value by ZMIN(,)  0. Since the
value of the cut produced by our algorithm can also be neg-
ative, a natural performance measure to consider is given
by

R(,) 
E
¢
ZH(, )
£
- ZMIN(,)
ZMAX(, ) - ZMIN(,)
.

Unfortunately, we could not find a constant lower bound
for R(,) that holds for all  and . Since -Wtotal 
ZMIN(,)  ZH(, ), we instead use -Wtotal as an
approximation to ZMIN(, ) and develop the bound given
in Theorem 3.
Although we cannot find a lower bound for R(,) that
holds in general, for specific instances of  and , we can
still assess the quality of our solution as indicated in the
following lemma.

Lemma 2. For any ,  0,

E
¢
ZH(,)
£
- ZMIN(,)
ZMAX - ZMIN(,)

E
¢
ZH(, )
£
+ E
¢
ZH(,)
£

ZP(, ) + ZP(,)
.

The proof of Lemma 2 makes use of the fact that ZMIN(,) =
-ZMAX(,). This result enables us to develop a conser-
vative lower bound on the quality of our solution for specific
instances of  and  by solving two semidefinite program-
ming problems: one with (,) and another with (,).

4. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we apply our algorithm to real purchase
data from Amazon.com, providing new insights into con-
sumer behaviors. Section 4.1 describes the dataset used in
our experiment. Section 4.2 compares the performance of
our algorithm with other heuristics. The next two sections
evaluate the set of early and late buyers identified by our al-
gorithm, contrasting the purchasing behavior between these
two groups of consumers. Finally, Section 4.5 concludes with
an evaluation of our algorithm for different values of  and
.

4.1 Dataset
We use purchase data from Amazon.com during the year
2002. To ensure that we have sufficiently many consumers,
we chose the top 50 most popular electronics items sold in
the year 2002 as the set of products for our analysis. More-
over, to eliminate consumers who purchased very few prod-
ucts, we only consider those who bought at least four of
these 50 products in 2002.
Given consumers i and j, we create an edge (i, j) with
weight wij  0 if among the 50 products that i and j have
bought in common, wij of those products were bought by
consumer i at least 24 hours prior to consumer j. We will use
purchase data from the year 2002 to identify the set of early
and late buyers. Then, we will evaluate the performance
of this set of consumers using purchase data from the year
2003.

4.2 Performance Comparison
We evaluate the performance of two different algorithms:
our algorithm based on SDP relaxations and the Top-Net-
Weight algorithm.



674
Research Track Poster

The Top-Net-Weight algorithm uses the following set of
nodes as an approximation to the optimal cut: {i  V :

È
jV
wij  
È
jV
wji
Ó
. Note that when  = , the al-
gorithm yields the optimal cut by Theorem 2.
For our experiment, we choose the following set of parame-
ters:  = 0.3365 and  = 0.5108. This choice of parameters
is motivated by the discussion in Section 2.1. We showed
that the parameters  and  are related to the probability
p1 that an early buyer will purchase a product before a late
buyer, where  = log 2p1, and  = -log 2(1 - p1).
Since an early buyer is more likely to purchase a product
before a late buyer, we want p1 to exceed 1/2. Our choice
of  and  is determined by setting p1 = 0.7. We chose this
value only as a benchmark, and in Section 4.5, we will eval-
uate the performance of our algorithm on different values of
 and . Also, for our algorithm, we use an implementa-
tion of the dual-scaling algorithm for positive semidefinite
programming developed by Benson and Ye [3].
The objective values of the cuts produced by the algo-
rithms are given in Table 1. The results in Table 1 show
that our algorithm based on semidefinite programming re-
laxations yields a 7.18% improvement in the objective value
over the Top-Net-Weight algorithm.

Algorithm
Number of Early Buyers
Objective
(as % of Total Customers)
Value
Top-Net-Weight
34.31%
700,037
SDP
48.93%
750,275

Table 1: Performance comparison between the Top-
Net-Weight algorithm and the SDP.


4.3 Overall Purchase Characteristics
Using the set of early and late buyers identified by our al-
gorithm, we compare the characteristics of these two groups
of consumers across different dimensions. We look at the fol-
lowing characteristics for the year 2002 and 2003: 1) overall
revenue (total amount of money that the consumer spent on
all products), 2) electronics revenue (total amount of money
that the consumer spent on electronics products), 3) overall
quantity (total quantity of all products purchased), and 4)
electronics quantity (total quantities of electronics products
purchased).
For each of these characteristics, we compute its average
for each group of consumers. Table 2 shows, for each vari-
able, the ratio between the average among the early buyers
and the average among the late buyers for the year 2002 and
2003. If the ratio exceeds one, then the average value among
the early buyers is higher than the average among the late
buyers. All variables are statistically significant at p-value
less than 5%.
It follows from Table 2 that for the year 2002, the early
buyers spent more money than the late buyers overall and on
electronics products. Moreover, the early buyers continued
to spend more money overall and on electronics products
even in the year 2003.

4.4 Sales Distributions Over Time
In the previous section, we showed that early and late buy-
ers exhibit significant differences in their overall purchasing
behaviors. In this section, we look at the actual timing of the
product purchases between these two groups of consumers.
Ratio Between
Ratio Between
Variable
Early and Late
Early and Late
Buyers
Buyers
(2002)
(2003)
overall revenue
1.16
1.06
electronics revenue
1.15
1.02
overall quantity
1.16
1.05
electronics quantity
1.14
0.98

Table 2: Purchase characteristics between early and
late buyers for the year 2002 and 2003. All variables
are statistically significant at p-value less than 5%.




0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1




DECNOVOCTSEPAUGJULJUNMAYAPRMARFEBJAN
Cumulative
Proporiton
of
Sales




Month
2002 Cumulative Sales Distribution For
Wireless Notebook Adapter
Wilcox test: Z=-402098, p-value=0.0000

Overall
Early Buyers
Late Buyers




Figure 1: Cumulative sales distribution for the year
2002 among early buyers, late buyers, and the over-
all population for a wireless notebook adapter




Figure 1 shows the cumulative sales distributions in 2002
for a wireless notebook adapter, one of the top selling elec-
tronics products in the year 2002 that appears in our analy-
sis. As expected, in the year 2002, the early buyers are more
likely to purchase this product before the late buyers. We
see from the graph that over 90% of the sales from the early
buyers occurred by July 2002, while at the same time, less
than 10% of the sales have occurred for the late buyers. A
similar purchasing pattern continues to holds for almost all
of the products in our analysis.
In Figure 2, we consider sales distributions for two brand
new products that were not introduced until the year 2003
(and hence not part of the analysis): a portable CD player
and a 40GB iPod. This figure shows the sales distribution in
the year 2003 for these two products. It it interesting to note
that the early buyers identified by our algorithm purchased
both of these products significantly before the late buyers.

4.5 Performance For Different  and 
We conclude this section by evaluating the performance of
the SDP algorithm against the Top-Net-Weight algorithm
introduced in Section 4.2 for different values of  and .
It follows from the definition that, for  > 0, the EARLY
BUYERS(G,,) problem is equivalent to the EARLY BUY-
ERS (G,/, 1) problem. Thus, in this experiment, we set
 = 1.0 and vary only the parameter . Figure 3 shows
the relative difference between the objective value under the
SDP and the Top-Net-Weight algorithm for different choices
of . As predicted by Theorem 2, when  =  = 1.0, the
difference is zero since both algorithms yield the optimal
value. However, as  differs from , the SDP outperforms



675
Research Track Poster

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1




DECNOVOCTSEPAUGJULJUNMAYAPRMARFEBJAN
Cumulative
Proporiton
of
Sales




Month
2003 Cumulative Sales Distribution For
Portable CD Player
Wilcox test: Z=-14, p-value=0.0087

Overall
Early Buyers
Late Buyers




0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1




DECNOVOCTSEPAUGJULJUNMAYAPRMARFEBJAN
Cumulative
Proporiton
of
Sales




Month
2003 Cumulative Sales Distribution For
40 GB iPod
Wilcox test: Z=-18, p-value=0.0022

Overall
Early Buyers
Late Buyers




(a) Portable CD Player
(b) 40GB iPod

Figure 2: Cumulative sales distribution in the year
2003 for (a) portable CD player and (b) 40GB iPod.
These products were not released until 2003.




0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
40.0%




0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Relative
Difference





Relative Difference Between the Objective Value
Under SDP Relaxtion and the Top-Net-Weight Algorithm
for Different Values of  (with =1.0)




Figure 3: Relative difference between the objective
values under the SDP and the Top-Net-Weight al-
gorithm for different values of . We set  = 1.0.



the Top-Net-Weight algorithm, yielding a much higher ob-
jective value for all values of .


5. CONCLUSIONS AND EXTENSIONS
We presented a non-parametric approach to the problem
of identifying early buyers. Our formulation makes use of a
new graphical representation of purchase data. We provided
an approximation algorithm based on semidefinite program-
ming relaxations and analyzed its performance. We also ap-
plied the algorithm to real purchase data from Amazon.com,
providing new insights into consumer behaviors. Our cur-
rent formulation offers many interesting extensions and di-
rections for future research. We outline a few of these here.

Scalability: Millions of consumers shopped at Amazon.com
in the past year. The SDP algorithm can handle only
thousands of consumers. It remains an open research
question if we can design an efficient approximation al-
gorithm that can scale up to the number of consumers
that we have at Amazon.com. We studied the SDP
algorithm primarily because it provides us with per-
formance guarantee.

Constraints on Number of Early Buyers: The paper aims
to identify consumers who tend to purchase products
earlier than other consumers. Thus, we do not impose
any constraint on the number of early buyers that we
can have. However, in certain applications, we might
want to know, say, the top 1% of the early buyers.
It is interesting to explore if we can introduce such
constraints into our problem formulation.

Definition of the Edge Weights: Currently, the weight
of an edge measures how frequently a consumer pur-
chased products before another consumer. We can cer-
tainly extend the definition of the weight to reflect the
time between purchases.

Product Life Cycles: Our formulation uses purchase data
during a specified time window, ignoring differences
in the product life cycles. Mature products exhibit
very different sale patterns than emerging products.
A more realistic model should incorporate this infor-
mation into the formulation.

Choices of  and : In this paper, we treat the parame-
ters  and  as given. In Section 2.1, we showed how
these parameters relate to the probability that an early
buyer will purchase a product before a late buyer. If
we know this probability a priori, we can use this in-
formation to estimate  and . Finding an approach
that estimates the parameters directly from the data
remains an open question.


Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Ronny Kohavi, Benjamin Van Roy, and
the referees whose suggestions greatly improved the con-
tent and the presentation of this paper. We also thank
Jeremy York, Doug Bryan, and Mike Perkowitz for many
helpful comments. We thank our colleagues, David Liu,
John Rauser, Dan Sommerfield, and Toby Walker for stimu-
lating discussions on related topics. We would like to thank
Yinyu Ye and Aileen Sandridge for pointers to interesting
problems during the early part of this research. Finally, we
are grateful to Steven J. Benson for the use of his semidefi-
nite programming solver and for all of his assistance.


6. REFERENCES
[1] R. Agrawal, S. Rajagopalan, R. Srikant, and Y. Xu, "Mining
Newsgroup Using Networks Arising From Social Behavior,"
WWW Conf., May 20-24, 2003, Budapest, Hungary.
[2] F. M. Bass, "A New Product Growth Model for Consumer
Durables," Management Science, 15 Jan 1969, pp. 215-227.
[3] S. Benson and Y. Ye, "DSDP4: A software package
implementing the dual-scaling algorithm for semidefinite
programming," Tech Report ANL/MCS-TM-255, Argonne
National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, June 2002. Software
downloadable from http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/benson/
[4] P. Domingos and M. Richardson, "Mining the Network Value
of Customers," KDD 2001.
[5] M. Goemans and D. Williamson, "Improved Approximation
Algorithms for Maximum Cut and Satisfiability Problems
Using Semidefinite Programming," J. of the ACM, vol. 42, pp.
1115-1145, 1995.
[6] V. Mahajan and E. Muller, "When Is It Worthwhile Targeting
the Majority Instead of the Innovators in a New Product
Launch?," J. of Marketing Research, 35, pp. 488-95, Nov 1998.
[7] V. Mahajan, E. Muller, and R. K. Srivastava, "Determination
of Adopter Categories by Using Innovation Diffusion Models,"
J. of Marketing Research, 27, pp. 37-50, 1990.
[8] M. Richardson and P. Domingos, "Mining Knowledge-Sharing
Sites for Viral Marketing," KDD 2002.




676
Research Track Poster

