PVA: A Self-Adaptive Personal View Agent System
Chien Chin Chen
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica
Nankang Taipei, Taiwan
+886-2-27883799 ext.1614

paton@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Meng Chang Chen
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica
Nankang Taipei, Taiwan
+886-2-27883799ext.1802

mcc@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Yeali Sun
Department of Information
Management, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan
+886-2-23630231 ext.2870

sunny@im.ntu.edu.tw


ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present PVA, an adaptive personal view
information agent system to track, learn and manage, user's
interests in Internet documents. When user's interests change,
PVA, in not only the contents, but also in the structure of user
profile, is modified to adapt to the changes. Experimental results
show that modulating the structure of user profile does increase
the accuracy of personalization systems.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Information Systems -
Information Storage and Retrieval -
Systems and Software (H.3.4): User profiles and alert services;
Information Systems - Information Interfaces and Presentation -
User Interfaces (H.5.2),

General Terms
Algorithms, Management, Design, Experimentation, Theory.

Keywords
WWW, Personalization, Personal view, Machine learning.

1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the explosive growth of Web documents makes an
information search a time consumingjob. Even though the current
keyword based search technologies could alleviate this pain, the
ambiguous queries debase their performances. To tackle this
problem, much research is involved on the personalization of
WWW access. The personalization systems learn user profiles[5]
and assist people when they are surfing the web. In this paper, we
present a system, Personal View Agent (PVA), that can
automatically organize a personal view by learning the user's
interests, and adapt the personal view to the user's changing
interests. There are three important features in PVA: (1) PVA
learns user profile without intervening in the user's browsing,
such as relevance feedback[13]. Although relevance feedback,
which asks users to manually rate pages may make sense, it is
troublesome to users and seldom done. In PVA, we use a proxy to
collect the training data without user intervention. (2) A user may
have interests in multiple domains. PVA, like the previous
works[2|[14], models each domain in vector space model[13].

Pen~ission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work tbr
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for prolit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to repuhlish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a tee.
KDD 01 San Francisco CA USA
Copyright ACM 2001 1-58113-391-x/01/08...$5.00
Furthermore, these vectors are organized into a hierarchical
structure (called personal view). Each node in personal view
represents a realistic topic. (3) PVA can adapt to changes in the
user's interests over time. Since user's interests often change,
personalization systems need to have a mechanism to adapt to the
changes.
While
many
previous
works[2][4][14]
are
only
concerned with the contents of user profile, PVA also modulates
the structure of personal view to adapt to changes in user's
interests.

2. RELATED WORK
Most personalization systems need training data to build the
initial user profile. Two critical issues should be considered in
designing personalization systems. One is modeling user's
interests in multiple domains, and the other is incrementally
updating user profiles. In general, a user has interests in multiple
domains (e.g. baseball, politics). In order to closely track user's
interests, personalization systems have to maintain multiple
domains of user's interests. WebACE[3] uses the clustering
algorithm to partition a user's access log so that each cluster
indicates
a
domain
of
user
preferences.
Alipes[14]
and
WebMate[2] exploit the vector space model for each domain of
user's interests represented, as a keyword vector. Naive Bayes[9]
is used in News Dude[l] to calculate the probability of a
document belonging to a domain of the user's interests. Although
these systems can represent the multiple domains of user's
interests, the domains of the user profile are orthogonal.
Pretschner et all12] proposes a novel model of user profile in
which the user profile is organized as a hierarchical structure,
rather than a set of independent domains. Thus, there is a general
to specific relationship in the user profile. Although the
representation of this user profile is innovative, Pretschner's work
does not make use of the characteristics of hierarchical structure
(e.g. to split or to merge nodes in the user profile) to capture the
dynamics of user's changing interests.

Since user's interests often change, it is important to be able to
incrementally adjust user profile. The previous work[l], [2], [4],
and [14] utilize relevance feedback to update the user profile.
Although relevance feedback is effective, users are overloaded.
[10] and [3] utilize a proxy to obtain users' feedbacks implicitly.
Techniques, such as page-browsing time and page-view frequency,
are used to measure preference for pages. In the discussion of
changes in user's interests, [1] and [14] present two types of the
user's interests. One is the short-term interest and the other is the
long-term interest. The short-term interest is usually caused by a
hot news event and quickly disappears. Generally, the long-term
interest often reflects a user's real interest.




257

Although each system has its own way to update user profile, they
are only concerned with the contents of user profile. The
experience from user's short-term interest indicates that not only
the contents of the user profile, but also the life cycle of each
concepts, should be considered. In PVA, we organize user's
interests in a hierarchical structure and apply the theory of
artificial life to adjust the structure of user profile. For more
information about personalization system, [11] provides a detailed
survey of existing systems and approaches in recent years.

3. USER PROFILE REPRESENTATION
The user profile of PVA, called personal view, is a category
hierarchy whereby each category represents a knowledge domain
of user's interests. The general-to-specific
property of the
personal view enhances the semantics of user profile and is much
closer to a human conception. Each category in personal view is
described through a keyword vector Vi and an energy value E~.
While V~,containing ofkeywords and their corresponding weights,
describes the content of user's interests, E~ indicates the
favorableness of a category. E~, like the endogenous fitness of
artificial life agent[8], controls the life span of a category in
personal view. The energy increases when a user is interested in
the web pages of a category, and it decreases for a constant value
over a period of time. Like feeding in the natural world, categories
that have high-energy value would generate sub-categories to
describe user's interests at a certain detailed level. Relatively,
categories of less interest will become abstracted gradually and
finally die out. Based on the energy values of the categories, the
structure of personal view can be modulated as user's interests
change.

To build a personal view, user's interests have to be tracked and
categorized. We adopt the classification method based on a pre-
defined category hierarchy, called world view, as the superset of
the category hierarchy of personal view. PVA consults world view
as the reference and extracts interesting categories to build its
personal view. In this study, our previous studies, ACIRD[6][7],
are selected as the world view.

4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
PVA is constituted of three major components: proxy, personal
view constructor (PVC), and personal view maintainer (PVM).
The following sub-sections provide details of each component.

4.1 Proxy
Besides relaying user's browsing requests, a major function of the
proxy is to track user preferences. Periodically (e.g. every day),
the proxy analyzes the activities of the previous period and sends
pages of interest to PVC. Pretschner's article[12] describes
visiting time duration of a page as a good measurement of
preference. In his experiments, a group of 16 users were
monitored for 26 days. During that period, the users jointly surfed
7664 documents. The results indicate that visits to 20% of the
pages are less than 5 seconds and the mean time of browsing a
page is 54.49 seconds. Hence, in our study, the pages, whose
visiting time is longer than a preset threshold (e.g., 2 minutes), are
sent to PVC to generate and update user profile.

4.2 Personal View Constructor
Personal view constructor organizes pages of interest to user in a
top-down manner. At first, pages are placed in abstract categories.
If a user continues to visit these categories, they will be split into
detailed sub-categories. On the contrary, categories not of interest
will be merged into abstract categories. As personal view employs
the vector space model, the Web page is parsed in a keyword
vector. For each term t~in a page p, we use the following formula
to calculate its weight, W~,p,:

freqi,p
~,P ~x~freqj,p}
J

WhereJ~eq~,pis the term frequency of a term i in a page p, and W~.p
is normalized to [0,1].

From [7], it is reported that the pure term frequency keyword
weighting function, as used in this study, performs better than the
traditional TF*IDF weighting function in a hierarchical category
learning system. Since IDF (Inverted Document Frequency) is
designed to enhance the discriminating capability of high
frequency terms among categories, the TF*IDF scheme is not
effective in this hierarchical learning model.

Then the parsed keyword vector is sent to an automatic classifier
to find the categories that the page belongs to. Each obtained
category represents a classification path that is a path from the
root to the assigned category in the world view. For example, a
Web page of professional basketball team is classified to the
category
of
"NBA"
and
the
classification
path
of
"'/Sport/Basketball/NBA/".
To insert the page of interest in
personal view, first we check if the category exists in personal
view. If the category exists, we insert the page in the category
directly. If the category does not exist, the page is inserted in the
non-root closest ancestor in personal view. If no non-root ancestor
exists, the top category of the classification path is created in
personal view and subsequently the page is inserted in that
category.

After pages are inserted in personal view, the keyword vectors and
the energy values of each node of personal view are updated. The
keyword vector of category c~ in personal view is updated as
follows:

z
Vp
p~Pinew



Where p~,w is the set of the newly inserted pages assigned to
category ci, the absolute value IP~"~i[is the number of documents
in P~i, and Vp is the keyword vector of Web page p. The
parameter
c~, called aging factor,
is used to adjust the
contribution of previously inserted documents to categories. The
value of o~ is set from 0 to 1; hence, older documents have less
effect on the representation of category. The following method is
used to calculate new energy value of each category:

Ej=Ej+
Y
cos(Z/,Zp)
pepnew

Where Ei is the energy value of category c~, Vi is the keyword
vector of category c~, Vp is the keyword vector of the page p that
belongs to the category ci, cos(Vi, Vp) which is the cosine similarity
between the two vectors. In other words, the energy value of a
category is the sum of similarities between its documents.
Defining energy value as the sum of similarities between the




258

newly inserted documents and knowledge of categories is intuitive.
A category is essential to a user who is interested in documents of
that category, and its energy value also increases as more
documents are inserted.

Like many previous studies, the aging mechanism of PVC could
update the contents of personal view. incrementally. However,
adjustment of the contents of categories is not enough. Users may
change their interests frequently. For instance, after the final game
of MLB, sport fans may shift attention to NBA. To adapt to the
change in user's interests, we need a mechanism to periodically
adjust the structure of personal view.

4.3 Personal View Maintainer
Two maintenance operators, split
and merge,
are used to
synchronize personal view with user's interests. The following
sub-sections provide details of these two operators.

4.3.1 Split
Since PVC organizes personal view from a top-down manner, a
category in the personal view generally comprises the concepts of
multiple sub-categories. This situation becomes apparent for the
category with high energy value. For instance, the knowledge of
category "Sport" in personal view for a sport fan user might
consist of concepts of its sub-categories "Basketbalf', "Baseball",
and "Tennis". When a user has strong interest in one concept, that
concept will dominate the knowledge contained in the category,
and knowledge of other concepts may fade. To solve this problem,
PVM splits a high energy category to generate a more specific
category. The following figure shows the algorithm of split. First,
each category's energy value is checked against a pre-defined
threshold. If the category's energy value is greater than the
threshold, the sub-category with most gain after the split is
generated in the personal view. Subsequently, the keyword
vectors and the energy values of both categories are updated.

For each category C in the Personal View
While (E¢ > threshold)
cchild= ARGMAXc~hildin c{ SplitGain(c,c~hila) };
Create the category cchitdin Personal View;
Update the energy value of c;
Calculate the energy value ofcchad;
Calculate the keyword vector of cchad;
Update the keyword vector of c;
End While;
End For:
Figure 1. The split algorithm of PVM.

We define a function, called split gain, to measure the gain
derived from splitting a sub-category Cehitafrom its parent Cp~r~,t,
in the following manner:

[c~o,,-~h,la[
,
SplitGain(Cparent,Cchlld) =Ent(Cparent)
~
En (Cparent-child)


where C~,~,~-~n,d is C~,~,, excluding C¢hitd, the function Ent(C)
defined below is the entropy value[9] of category C:

Ent(C)=-
E
P(c)lnP(c)
CeCsub

Where C~b is a set of C's sub-categories, P(c) is the proportion of
documents of category c to all documents in C. When PVC inserts
new pages in personal view, its elassification information, based
on the employed auto-classifier, is also stored in two tables. One
table keeps the number of documents per category; and the other
records the document frequency[13] of each term. Hence the
value P(c) is easily obtained by looking up the tables. Entropy is
frequently used to measure the purity of a collection of data. The
split gain shows the reduction in entropy after a sub-category is
split from its parent category. The sub-category with the maximal
split gain is created and it splits from its parent in the personal
view.

After the candidate child category is determined in the high
energy parent category, the keyword vectors and energy values of
both categories have to be adjusted. The energy values are
updated as follows:

]Cparent-childl




For the child category, we use the following formula to create its
keyword vector:

dfi,child
WiTchild = Wi,parent *
dfi,parent_chil d +dfi,child

Wi?child



The dfi,~hadand df,mr~,..~hila are document frequencies of term i in
the child category and split-parent category, respectively. The
dfi:hila / (dfi,m,~.t-~hila + df,~hita) in the above formula promotes
terms that are specific to the child category having high weights in
the child category.

Since there is information loss in parent category, we have to
adjust the weights of terms in parent category. The following
formula is used to revise the weights in parent category:

dfi,parent-child
Wi,parent = Wi,parent
dfi,parent_chil d + dfi,child

WiTparent
Wi'paren'
M~{Wj.parent }


The df,m,~,~.~hila / df,~,~,t-~h,a + df.~nila in the above formula
measures the surplus value of a term in parent category after the
split. Terms that mainly reside in the child category will lose
representation in the parent category.

4.3.2
Merge
In contrast to the split operation that highlights categories of
interest in personal view, the merge operator is the mechanism
that removes out-of-favor categories. Following the idea of A-Life
agent[8], categories in personal view are charged the energy cost
of living. The cost is spent on grabbing food (i.e. documents
inserted in the personal view) and generating offspring (i.e.
splitting new categories). Categories with an unfailing support of
documents can continuously live; otherwise, they will become
weak and finally die out. In PVA, every category's energy value
will reduce in a certain value for every period of time. When only




259

a few or no interesting documents are added to a category, its
energy value will decline gradually. To keep a personal view on
par with user's interests and trends, categories with low energy
values are removed. Before deleting a low energy category, its
knowledge is retumed to its parent node. The following figure
shows the algorithm that merges the information of low energy
categories with their parent.

For each category c in personal view
E~=E~-/3;
If E~ <= th then
Update the keyword vector of c's parent;
Remove the category c from personal view;
End If;
End For;

Figure 2. Algorithm of decaying and merging categories in
personal view.

The algorithm reduces the energy value of each category
periodically. The parameter /3, called decayfactor, is used to
control the reduction rate. If a category's energy value is less than
(or equal to) a pre-defined threshold (i.e. th in the algorithm), we
remove the category from personal view and merge its knowledge
with its parent, by using the following formula:


Wi,parent=Wt,porent*<l+dfi,parent)
Wi,parent
M/jX{Wj, parent}


5. EXPERIMENTS
Two experiments are designed to verify the design concept and to
evaluate the performance of PVA. The world view and automatic
classifier of PVC are borrowed from an application (automatic
news classification) of ACIRD. So far, the world view is a 3-level
hierarchy that consists of 55 categories and is trained daily with
news from three news agencies.

5.1 An example of personal view's life cycle
This experiment is an observation of personal view over a 21-day
period (from October 1, 2000 to October 21, 2000). An expert
was requested to use PVA to read news from several news
agencies. An average of 14 pages out of 60 pages per day were
added to the personal view. Parameters of a and /3 were set as
0.95 and 0.5, respectively. The following figure shows the final
structure of personal view, with the expert showing interest in
MLB, NBA and politics news. User preferences are shown in
different shades, with more interest in darker shades.




<~.7~TM)
~ .....................




//
/




Figure 3. The personal view after 21 days.
30 ~
__


2
5
~
/

20--

Energy 15~

10




I~Politi¢s
l~tfighLeve2NcwsnSecretaryNcwsPlO[ob~!Ncws IIFinar~
I~$tc,ckN~,vs
IIHighT~h"~
DEntcamnncnt
IMovi¢
IINudc
el Sporl
m Bic~kctbdl
ONBA
IIBl~cba]]
J
IIMBL
IlOlyrr~ici
IF0¢d
OTravd
ORcadmg
OA~


Figure 4. The life cycle of a personal view.



30

25

2O

15

10

5

0
/


1 3 5 7 9 I1 13 15 17 19 21

Day
, Sport

=
Basketball

-"+'-- NBA

Baseball

=
MLB

· "Olympics




Figure 5. Life cycles of sport related categories.


30
25
20

15
10
5
0
1
4
7
10 13 16 19


Day
,
Finance

=:
Stock News


"---~'~ Politics


x
---High Level News


:
Secretary News


·
Global News


,
" Entertainment


m
Movie


"~-"'
Music



Figure 6. Life cycles of long term interests.

Figure 4 shows personal view's life cycle and Figures 5 to 7
provide a detailed look of each category. Some interesting
phenomena can be observed from these figures. In Figure 5, the
category "Olympics" had high energy values in the beginning.
This is due to the extensive coverage of the Olympic Games by
most sport news. However, after the Olympic Games ended on
Oct. 2, energy value of "Olympics"gradually went down from Oct.
4. It is interesting to see that personal view can catch the rise and
fall of news events. Another interesting phenomenon appears in




260

the category "MLB" on Oct. 8. Its energy keeps on increasing to
finally become the hottest category in the personal view. Oct. 8
was the playoff day of Major League Baseball where this baseball
enthusiast (i.e. the expert) would not miss any baseball news. The
growth of category "NBA"
is similar to that of "MLB".
Coincidentally, the creation of the category "NBA" in the personal
view was tied to the warm-up period of NBA. From this diagram,
we can see that the split operator can catch the short-term events.

Figure 6 reveals another kind of user's interest. The life cycle of
these interests, unlike those of"MLB" and "NBA", are very steady.
These categories can be eonsidered as user's long-term interests,
and interesting news from these categories are not restricted from
a specific time period.

Figure 7 shows some transient categories. Two causes of the
situation are: (l) the misclassification of ACIRD. According to
[6],
Top
1 precision
of
ACIRD
is
about
60%.
The
misclassification of pages results in the creation of categories
irrelevant to user's interests. For example, news about traffic
accidents are sometimes classified under "Travel" category since
they usually contain names of tourist spots and terms of
transportation. Fortunately, this misclassification does not happen
frequently. The energy decay mechanism and merge operator of
PVA can quickly remedy this problem by eliminating these
categories. (2) Another cause is called flash event. One of the
hottest cvems on Oct. 13 was that Kao XingJian won the Nobel
Prize in Literature. The category "Reading" was generated
because this topic became interesting news reported by many
newspapers. Observations of the personal view's life cycle reveal
that "Reading" is not an important part of user's interests. Under
the operation of the merge operator, the popularity of "Reading"
lasted only for a few days.



30

25

20



10

5

0
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19 21

Day
'
Food

--o--,Travel

[ "-"¢-'--
Reading

i ~ A r t




Figure 7. Growth of Noise categories.

This experiment shows the effects of split and merge operators.
The split operator makes personal view more detailed and specific
to user current interests, while the merge operator eliminates noise,
which is unavoidable in machine learning, especially in the
absence of training data. The merge operator also reduces the
interference in user profile.

5.2 Precision and recall of personal view.
In this experiment, the traditional IR measurement precision and
recall are used to evaluate PVA's performance. This experiment
was based on the previous example. After a daily training, we
randomly selected I00 documents of the same training day, from a
testing corpus of 6630 documents with every document in the
testing corpus classified manually, and marked as interesting or
not-interesting. Testing data are classified by calculating the
cosine similarity between documents and categories in personal
view. If the cosine similarity values are greater than a threshold,
we classify the testing data under categories and define the
passing data as filtering data. The precision and recall functions
are defined below:




Where D~lt,,~ais a set of documents that passes through filtering,
Dm~,~a~,,,r~t~,,~ is a subset of Dmt.,,d that is of interest to the user,
and Di,,,~.~..g is a subset of a day's testing documents that are of
interest to the user.

To examine the benefit of split and merge operators, PVA is
compared with two personalization systems, WebMate[2] and
Pretsehner's system[12], in which only the contents of user profile
adjusts when user's interest changes. The two systems are at two
extremes because Pretschner's system builds a more specific user
profile, while WebMate formats a more general one. In contrast to
these two systems, PVA constructs a user profile midway in
between. All these three systems are trained and tested in the same
manner. The following figures show the results of the comparison.



Comparison of precision




0.8
o: 0.7
.~ 0.6
·- 0.5
~0.4
0.3
0.2
%
1
I
~
I
i
i
i
t
L
h
i
t




Day


[~
PVA
o
WebMate~
Pretschner]

Figure 8. The precision of three systems.

Comparisonof recall



0.8
0.7
~
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
%
L
J
~
l
~
,
l
,
l
,
t
l
~
l
l
l
l
l
l
J




Day


[~PVA
u
WebMate
e.
Pretschner [

Figure 9. The recall of three systems.




261

It can be observed from Figures 8 and 9 that PVA performed
better than the others. We decipher the reason of its success in the
following sub-sections.

5.2.1 In comparison with WebMate:
From Figure 8 we can see that the precision of WebMate is as
expected while its recall was quite low. The fine precision is due
to the size of the user profile. As we mentioned above, WebMate
strives to build a more general profile of a user. The small size of
the user profile's categories probably allows the training data to
be correctly classified. Hence, it can maintain accurate precision.
However, the lack of a split operator causes the following
drawbacks to WebMate; (1) A topic in WebMate may comprise a
lot of concepts; e.g., the "Sports" category may comprise the
concepts of MLB, NBA, NFL, etc. This situation may result in a
diversified keyword vector where the classification correction rate
is reduced. (2) The contents of a category are dominated by one
topic, e.g., NBA outshines the other sport sub-categories in
"Sport" category during the basketball season. This situation may
result in low recall rate since other sports are excluded from user
profile. In PVA, topics of user's interests can be specified by
using the split operator.

5.2.2 In comparison with Pretschner's system:
Even though the recall of Pretschner's system was quite high, its
precision was low (and tended to move downward as time went
on). The fine recall is due to the large size of its profile. Since
Pretshner tries to pinpoint the user's interests, it usually constructs
a huge profile. The larger the user profile, the more topics of
user's interests are covered. However, the relatively small number
of documents in the training data makes the knowledge of
categories inaccurate, which drives the precision rate downward
as time goes on. In PVA, this problem can be eliminated by using
the merge operator.

By using the split and merge operators, we can take advantages of
these two extreme systems, without inheriting their drawbacks.

6. CONCLUSION
In this study, we present a system, PVA, to learn user's interests
without intervening in the user's browsing. Issues of modeling
multiple domains of user's interests and adapting to changes in
user's interests can be solved in PVA. Furthermore, we can
organize the user profile in a hierarchical category structure, to
provide rich semantics to applications like query extension,
information
filtering and web pages recommendation.
The
experiments show that two personal view maintainer functions,
(split and merge), which adjust to the structure of user profile,
improve the performance of personalization system.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Daniel Billsus, Michael J. Pazzani, "A Personal News Agent
that Talks, Learns and Explains",
Third International
Conference on Autonomous Agents, 1999.
[2] Liren Chen, Katia Sycara, "WebMate." A Personal Agent for
Browsing and Searching", proceedings of the second
international conference on Autonomous Agents, 1998.
[3] Eui-Hong Han, Daniel Boley, Maria Gini, Robert Gross,
Kyle Hastings, George Karypis, Vipin Kumar, Bamshad
Mobasher, Jerome Moore, "WebACE: A Web Agent for
Document Categorization and Exploration", proceedings of
the second international conference on Autonomous Agents,
1998.
[4] Keiichiro Hoashi, Kazunori Matsumoto, Naomi Inoue,
Kazuo Hashimoto, "Document Filtering Method Using Non-
Relevant Information Profile", SIGIR, 2000.
[5] Robert R. Korfhage, "Information Storage and Retrieval",
Wiley Computer Publishing, 1997.
[6] Shian-Hua Lin, Chi-Sheng Shih, Meng Chang Chen, Jan-
Ming Ho, Ming-Tat Ko, and Yueh-Ming Huang, "Extracting
Classification
Knowledge of Internet Documents with
Mining
Term
Associations:
A
semantic
Approach",
Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, 1998.
[7] Shian-Hua Lin, Chi-Sheng Shih, Meng Chang Chen, Jan-
Ming Ho, Ming-Tat Ko, and Yueh-Ming Huang, "ACIRD:
Intelligent Internet Documents Organization and Retrieval",
Technical Report, IIS, Academia Sinica. To appear on IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.
[8] Filippo Menczer, Richard K. Belew, Wolfram Willuhn,
"Artificial Life Applied to Adaptive Information Agents",
AAAI Spring Symposium Series: Information gathering from
heterogeneous, distributed environment, AAAI, 1995.
[9] Tom M. Mitchell, "Machine Learning", WCB McGraw-Hill,
1997.
[10]Dunja Mladenie, "Machine Learning Used by Personal
WebWatcher", Proc. Of ACAI-99 Workshop on Machine
Learning and Intelligent Agents, 1999.
[11] Alexander Pretschner, Susan Gauch, "Personalization on the
Web",
Technical
Report
ITTC-FY2000-TR-13591-01,
Information and Telecommunication Technology Center
(ITTC), The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, December,
1999.
[12]Alexander Pretschner,
Susan Gauch, "Ontology Based
Personalized Search", Proc. 11th IEEE Intl. Conf. On Tools
with Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
[13] Gerard
Salton,
"Automatic
Text
Processing:
The
Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of Information by
Computer", Addison Wesley, 1989.
[14]Dwi H. Widyantoro, Thomas R. Ioerger, John Yen, "An
Adaptive Algorithm for Learning Changes in User Interests",
Eighth
International
Conference
on
Information
and
Knowledge Management (CIKM'99), 1999.




262

